Title: ATLAS: Active Theory Learning for Automated Science

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.12386v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:28:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
#  ATLAS: Active Theory Learning for Automated Science 

Noémi Éltet˝ o

Google DeepMind London, UK 

noemielteto@deepmind.com 

Nathaniel D. Daw 

Princeton University; Google DeepMind Princeton, NJ, USA 

ndaw@deepmind.com 

Kimberly L. Stachenfeld 

Google DeepMind; Colombia University New York, NY, USA 

stachenfeld@deepmind.com 

Kevin J. Miller 

Google DeepMind; University College London London, UK 

kevinjmiller@deepmind.com 

# Abstract 

Advancing scientific understanding through mechanistic modeling requires posing the right experimental questions to yield maximally informative data. To auto-mate this pursuit within cognitive science, we introduce ATLAS (Active Theory Learning for Automated Science), an active learning framework for the data-driven discovery of interpretable behavioral models. ATLAS iterates between generating mechanistic hypotheses—instantiated as a diverse ensemble of sparse neural net-works (Disentangled RNNs)—and designing experiments that optimally distinguish between them. We test this approach on the problem of recovering reinforcement learning agents from their behavior in bandit tasks. ATLAS designs varied se-quences of qualitatively novel experiments with temporal structure tailored to underlying agent characteristics. The models trained on these experiments are evaluated against a comprehensive set of metrics for mechanistic modeling that capture behavioral, structural, and computational similarity. ATLAS achieves a 

5–10 × improvement in sample efficiency across all metrics compared to random experimentation, and its performance is further validated against expert-designed experiments derived from literature. These in silico results showcase ATLAS’s potential to accelerate human-interpretable insights in cognitive science and other domains where scientific inquiry relies on discovering mechanistic models. 

# 1 Introduction 

A central goal of cognitive science is to discover the algorithms that control the behavior of humans, animals, and artificial agents. Research often proceeds via an iterative process of experimentation and computational modeling. Models serve as tentative hypotheses about the true algorithm, and guide the choice of next experiments. Data from experiments serves in turn to refine models [ 1 ]. This can be understood as an iterative closed-loop process alternating data-driven hypothesis discovery and hypothesis-driven data collection. Accelerating this process using machine learning remains a major open direction [2–5]. Recent techniques for data-driven model discovery make it possible to automatically identify com-putational models that both match data well and are interpretable to human researchers as plausible algorithmic hypotheses [ 6–13 ]. These approaches surface a small set of models that are both simple and consistent with a dataset, from a vast space of possibilities. This generality comes with a cost: these methods typically require large datasets in order to identify meaningful models. This makes 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2606.12386v1 [cs.LG] 10 Jun 2026

# Leaky Actor-Critic Q-Learning 10x 10x 5x 5x 5x Figure 1: ATLAS provides 5–10 × sample efficiency over random experimentation . Here, we use ATLAS to uncover the behavior and structure of two RL agents: Q-learning (Top) and Leaky Actor-Critic (Bottom). We compare 8 independent runs of ATLAS to 10 runs of random experimentation. 

(Left) Performance of the best-fitting models at predicting agent behavior in held-out experiments. Solid lines indicate the mean performance across independent runs, while the shaded regions represent 

±1 standard error of the mean (SEM). Asterisks indicate significant advantage of ATLAS over random experiments ( p < 0.05 , of Welch’s one-tailed t-test). The horizontal dashed line represents the performance ceiling. (Middle) The probability of recovering the true underlying computational graph. Solid lines denote the fraction of successful recoveries. Shaded regions represent the 68% 

Wilson score interval. Asterisks indicate significance ( p < 0.05 , one-tailed Barnards’s exact test). 

(Right) Averaged state prediction MSE for the ground truth agent simulated in the model and vice versa. Asterisks indicate significance ( p < 0.05 , Welch’s one-tailed t-test). them difficult to apply in situations, typical in cognitive science, where experiments are costly and time-consuming. Active Learning [ 14 ] and Optimal Experiment Design [ 15 ] are subfields of statistics and machine learning that are concerned with developing automated tools for designing experiments for efficient data collection. These tools iterate between identifying the most informative data points to sample and updating a model based on the new data. While broadly applied, existing approaches typically either optimize black-box predictive models [ 14 , 15 ], which lack interpretability, or discriminate among pre-specified mechanistic models [ 16 , 17 ], which carry a risk of misspecification and limit discovery. To bridge this gap, we introduce ATLAS (Active Theory Learning for Automated Science). ATLAS implements an Active Learning loop using an ensemble of disentangled recurrent neural networks (DisRNNs) [ 6], which have been used to discover computational models from behavior in a variety of contexts [ 18 –21 ]. DisRNNs use information bottlenecks to encourage solutions that consist of a small number of sparsely interacting latent (“cognitive”) variables. The latent variable interactions can be interpreted as a hypothetical computational graph for the underlying mechanism. The strength of this sparsity constraint can be varied parametrically, and we use this to maintain ensemble diversity. We use an evolutionary algorithm to identify experimental parameters that optimize for disagreement among the members of the ensemble. We apply this approach to the problem of discovering mechanistic models of simple reinforcement agents based on their behavior, using as few behavioral experiments as possible (Figure 1). We find that ATLAS-designed experiments are able to identify strong models using 5–10 × fewer experiments than random experiments. These models are not only strong predictive models, accurately describing the behavior of the RL agents on out-of-distribution test experiments (Figure 1, left), but also discover the correct computational structure (Figure 1, middle) and dynamics (Figure 1, right). We also find 2that ATLAS matches or exceeds the performance of fixed, expert-designed baselines by tailoring its experiments to the specific agent being studied (Figure 5). In addition to performing well, ATLAS-designed experiments often have interpretable structure: they exhibit a combination of regular and irregular structure on different timescales that make them effective at uncovering behavior, but quite unlike what researchers tend to design. Our specific contributions are: • We demonstrate that combining methods from disagreement-based active learning with methods for automatic discovery of interpretable mechanistic models results in a practical framework for closed-loop scientific discovery. We refer to this framework, which links data-driven hypothesis generation with hypothesis-driven experiment selection, as Active Theory Learning for Automated Science (ATLAS). • We demonstrate that Disentangled RNNs [ 22 ] perform well in ATLAS, surfacing sufficiently diverse hypotheses to enable strong experimental design. • We develop an optimizer over experiment designs that consist of binary matrices. We demon-strate that this results in experiments that drive strong disagreement between individual handcrafted models, and that it performs well in the context of ATLAS. • We apply ATLAS to the problem of discovering reinforcement learning algorithms (Q-learning and Actor-Critic) from their overt behavior. We demonstrate that ATLAS discovers strong models of these algorithms using an order of magnitude fewer experiments than random experimentation, and that it outperforms even expert-designed experiments. 

# 2 Related Work 

Active learning studies how a learner should select the most informative data point to query [ 14 ]. A foundational approach in this space is Query by Committee (QBC) [ 23 , 24 ], in which a committee of models is maintained, each consistent with the observed data, and the learner queries the instance on which the committee members most disagree. QBC provides a natural framework for model-driven experimentation: the committee’s disagreement identifies regions where the current data are insufficient to distinguish between competing hypotheses. Our approach shares this spirit, but replaces the committee with an ensemble of neural networks whose structure encourages qualitatively distinct models. Several measures of committee disagreement have been proposed. Vote entropy [ 25 ] and KL-divergence-based measures [ 26 ] quantify the diversity of predictions across committee members. More recently, Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD) [ 27 ] formalized disagreement as the mutual information between model predictions and model parameters, providing a principled information-theoretic objective. 

Optimal Experiment Design applies Active Learning to science where the best experiment is the one that is most informative about a scientific theory, written as a computational model [ 28 , 29 ]. Indeed, the expected information gain about the parameters of a scientific model [ 30 – 33 ] is theoretically unified with BALD [34]. Optimal experiment design has been applied to numerous prediction and design problems, includ-ing materials discovery [ 35 ], drug design [ 36 ], physics simulations [ 37 ], and cognitive science [ 38 ]. Notably, these applications involve fitting blackbox predictive models rather than identifying interpretable mechanistic models. In cognitive science and psychology, automated experiment design has been developed for parameter estimation of a fixed model [ 39 , 40 ], as well as for discriminating among model classes [ 16 , 17 ]. However, as Rainforth et al. [29] note, “experiment design is only ever as good as the underlying model.” If the assumed model is fundamentally misspecified, it can drive a vicious cycle of biased data collection in irrelevant corners of the design space; escaping this trap remains an open challenge. Indeed, complex ground-truth models and/or restrictive model classes sometimes result in situations where random experiments outperform those selected by active learning [ 41 , 42 ]. This motivates approaches that reason over the model structure itself. Our work addresses this by leveraging structurally constrained neural networks, whose internal diversity naturally encodes qualitatively distinct mechanistic hypotheses. 3Interpretable recurrent neural network models. Our approach builds on the Disentangled RNN (DisRNN; [ 6 ]), which learns recurrent dynamics with sparse, disentangled latent states. By penalizing superfluous internal representations, DisRNNs converge on tunably minimal models, ensuring that ensemble disagreement reflects meaningful structural differences rather than superficial parameter variation. This distinguishes our approach from standard deep ensemble methods [ 43 ], where disagreement may arise from random initialization without corresponding to interpretably different hypotheses. 

# 3 The ATLAS pipeline 

ATLAS consists of iterative cycles of model discovery and experimental design (Figure 2). We consider problems that involve discovering the computational structure of an unknown reinforcement learning agent, based on observations of its behavior on context-free bandit problems with binary rewards. In each experiment the agent chooses repeatedly one of A available actions for up to T

trials and observes a binary reward. Different agents will adapt their future choices in response to the rewards in ways that reflect different computational structures and assumptions about the environment. These problems are close in silico analogs of the problem of discovering the algorithms of human and animal reward learning from behavior, a widely-studied open problem in cognitive science [44, 45]. 

Figure 2: Schematic of ATLAS. An ATLAS cycle begins with either an initial, very small, dataset, from which it generates an ensemble of mechanistic models (Hypothesis Generator) or with a fixed set of models provided as input. Next it maximizes disagreement among the models to optimize the information gain of the experiment design (Experiment Optimizer). Finally, it runs that experiment (Experiment Runner) to expand the continually growing Dataset. 

3.1 Experiment Optimizer 

Generally, an experiment design D can be expressed as a tensor of time-varying inputs to the system of study. In our setting, we constrain D to be a binary T ×A matrix D, where each entry Dt(a)

defines the reward received by an agent taking action a at timestep t.Each Hypothesis Generation step yields an ensemble E of K mechanistic models. These can be thought of as competing hypotheses, plausible based on the data so far, for the generative reinforcement learning agent that ATLAS is trying to discover. Each model Ei consists of an initial state vector s0 and an update rule st+1 , π t+1 = F (st, a t, r t), which takes in the current state st,action at, and reward rt and outputs the updated state st+1 and the next action probabilities πt+1 (a).Given a candidate experiment D and a model Ei, simulated choice behavior can be sampled from the model. At each timestep t, upon the agent’s choice at, the resulting reward is obtained from the experiment as rt = Dt(at). This yields a simulated trajectory τ i = ( ai

> 1

, r i

> 1

, . . . , a iT , r iT ). To reduce variance, we generate a batch B of B independent trajectories for each model, with τ ib indicating the 

bth trajectory sampled under model Ei.4To compute model disagreement, we first compute the log-likelihood of the simulated trajectories under each model: 

ℓij = ˆEB

log p(τ i | E j ) = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1
> T

X

> t=1

log πjt (ait|a1: t−1, r i

> 1: t−1

) (1) where ℓij gives the average log-likelihood under the model Ej of a batch of B trajectories τ i generated by model Ei.The expected information gain (EIG) from an experiment design D is approximated by the ensemble disagreement – that is, by how much more likely each model considers its own trajectories compared to the trajectories of the other models: 

EIG( d) = 1

K(K−1) 

> K

X

> i=1
> K

X 

> j=1
> j̸=i

  ℓii 

|{z} 

> self-agreement

− ℓij 

|{z} 

> cross-agreement

. (2) 

EIG( d) is high when individual ensemble members predict distinct behavioral trajectories with high confidence, leading to strong disagreement among the models. Analogous to the BALD [ 27 ] objective, this score quantifies the expected information gain about the true identity of the generative model given the experimental outcome. Identifying a high-quality experiment for a given ensemble therefore requires finding an input D that maximizes this disagreement, thereby making the underlying models highly distinguishable. We optimize Eq. 2 using an iterative hill climbing strategy. We initialize the binary experiment design matrix D randomly. We then consider elements one-at-a-time in a random order without replacement, flipping the associated bit and accepting the change if it increases the EIG and rejecting it otherwise. Once all elements have been considered we repeat this process, until a full pass through all entries yields no improvement, indicating that hill climbing has converged. To mitigate the risk of converging to a local optimum, we repeat this process 128 times using different randomly initialized experiments. We evaluate each converged experiment on a new set of rollouts B′ and select the experiment with the highest score. We first evaluate the Experiment Optimizer in isolation from the rest of ATLAS to demonstrate its sensitivity to differences within an ensemble. For this, we set up a simple example where the ensemble members are identical Q-learning agents that differ only in a single parameter: the learning rate. Specifically, we fixed a reference agent QMedium (α = 0 .2) and paired it with one of four comparison agents spanning slower ( QVery Slow , α = 0 .05 ; QSlow , α = 0 .1) and faster ( QFast , α = 0 .4;

QVery Fast , α = 0 .8) learning rates. Each of the four optimized experiments shows remarkable temporal structure (Figure 3). For example, the experiment optimized to distinguish QMedium from QVery Slow features a partially overlapping block structure: initially, only one choice is rewarding, followed by both, then the alternative choice, both again, and finally returning to the first. Notably, this pattern is interrupted by an anomalous reward omission. This omission must necessarily improve EIG; otherwise, the optimization algorithm would have flipped it prior to convergence. Indeed, this specific trial was part of the optimized design in all 10 independent runs (Appendix A.1). Examining the timeseries of choice probabilities from QMedium and QVery Slow , we see that these anomalous trials cause a distinct fast or slow change in policy. We also see that the timing of the block changes is not arbitrary – the blocks change when the policies of the two agents become similar. The other three experiments—optimized to distinguish QSlow , QFast , and QVery Fast from the reference—are temporally scaled versions of the first experiment. The frequency of alternation in these block designs maps faithfully onto the difference in learning timescales between the agents, confirming that the Experiment Optimizer successfully exploits meaningful ensemble diversity to maximize information gain, and the designs can be interpreted post-hoc. 

3.2 Experiment Runner and Dataset 

The Dataset is initially seeded with two random experiments. In each subsequent ATLAS cycle, the newly optimized experiment is executed, yielding a single behavioral trajectory from the ground-truth agent that is appended to the Dataset. 5-Critic 

> reward reward no reward no reward

Figure 3: Optimized experiments for Q-Learners with different learning rates . We optimized binary reward matrices to distinguish a reference agent QMedium with learning rate α = 0 .2 from four comparison agents spanning slower and faster learning rates α = 0 .05 to α = 0 .8. (Left) For the QMedium and QVery Slow pair, the expected information gain (EIG) converges in < 5,000 evolution timesteps. Thin lines in teal correspond to 128 seeds optimized on a batch of simulated agent trajectories B = 10 × 1024 , and the thick line in pink is the experiment with the highest EIG as evaluated on a separate batch B′ = 10 × 1024 . Vertical lines represent convergence checks. (Right) 

The four panels display the optimized experiments for four pairs of Q-learning agents. Experiments consist of a binary reward matrix where gray indicates that a reward of 1 will be given depending on the action, and white indicates a reward of 0. Superimposed on each experiment is a small batch of 100 trajectories generated from each agent, with the action probabilities from the fixed reference agent QMedium in pink, and the comparison agent ( QVery Slow , QSlow , QFast , or QVery Fast ) in burgundy. 

3.3 Hypothesis Generator 

Once the new experiment and its results have been added to the dataset, the next step in the ATLAS cycle is to create a new ensemble of hypotheses, instantiated as sparse neural networks. This involves two stages: First we generate a large and diverse set of candidate hypotheses, then we choose a subset of these to be used as the next ensemble of interest. Specifically, the Hypothesis Generator trains a new set of Disentangled RNNs (DisRNNs, [ 6]) from scratch on the updated dataset. The set includes both multiple random seeds as well as a range of values for the DisRNN penalty parameter, which controls the tradeoff between quality-of-fit and model complexity (Appendix A.3). For each set of hyperparameters, we train three networks: two networks on the two halves of the dataset (even and odd-numbered experiments), and one on the entire dataset. We evaluate quality-of-fit for a set of hyperparameters using cross-validation between the even and odd splits, and take the model trained on the entire dataset as the hypothesis discovered with those hyperparameters. This results in a large set of models with different tradeoffs between quality-of-fit and simplicity. Some of these, with higher values of the complexity penalty, will represent hypotheses that are too structurally simple to capture the existing experimental data, and will have poor quality of fit due to underfitting. Others, with lower values of the complexity penalty, will be too complex, and have poor quality of fit due to overfitting (Figure 10). Models with good cross-validated quality of fit may be plausible mechanistic models given the current dataset. To select an ensemble of these, we sample models probabilistically using an offset softmax distribution over candidate cross-validation likelihoods (Appendix A.6). This has the effect that ATLAS is more exploratory on early cycles when model quality is poor, and more strongly prefers performant hypotheses in later cycles when quality is higher (Appendix A.6). ATLAS is robust to other reasonable choices of ensemble selection, as uniform selection and top-K selection also yield competitive results (Appendix A.6.1). 

# 4 Results 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

We tested ATLAS separately with two ground-truth agents: a Q-learning agent and a Leaky Actor-Critic Agent [ 46 ] (see Appendix A.2 for details). We selected these agents because they represent two 6Figure 4: Structured models drive structured experiments in ATLAS. Example cycles from an arbitrarily chosen run (seed 2) are shown for Q-learning (top) and Leaky Actor-Critic (bottom). For each agent: ( First Row ) Computational graphs of the two ensemble members. ( Second Row )Optimized experiments and 100 simulated trajectories of the two ensemble members. There is rich temporal structure within each experiment, as well as a variety of structures over the sequence of experiments. ( Third Row ) Graph representations of the best-fit models, reflecting the shift from over-sparse approximations to a complex model that is isomorphic to the ground truth graph by cycle 100. Tick marks indicate isomorphism with the ground truth. different computational structures that both have relevance in cognitive science, and have previously been used as a test case for DisRNN [ 6 ]. To evaluate consistency, we performed eight independent ATLAS runs for each dataset, each for a total of 100 cycles. We compare ATLAS to two open-loop strategies for generating experiments: random rewards drawn i.i.d. or from Gaussian random walks. Random experimentation is robust and widely applied when well-informed models are unavailable, from random mutagenesis in molecular biology [ 47 ], to random screening in drug discovery [ 48 ], to random neural perturbations in neuroscience [ 49 , 50 ]. Within cognitive science, Musslick et al. [ 42 ] clearly demonstrated cases where unbiased experimentation is superior to active learning, which tends to sample narrowly when guided by misspecified models. Therefore, our first baseline consists of a set of i.i.d. experiments where rewards on each trial are sampled independently with a probability of 0.5.Rather than relying on random designs, neuroscience and psychology labs typically study reward-guided learning and decision-making using fully handcrafted tasks or expert-defined procedural generators. A common example is to sample rewards from independent Gaussian random walks [ 51 , 52 , 22 , 12 ], which allows for substantial autocorrelation in reward probabilities and encourages the subject to develop strong preferences for one alternative or the other at various times in the experiment. We adopt this generator as our second baseline, matching the particular walks used in [22], an early dataset collected with the goal of supporting data-driven model discovery. 74.2 Evaluation 

ATLAS is a tool for choosing which experiments to run, and its output is the resulting dataset. A dataset is successful if it is sufficient to allow discovering strong models of the ground-truth agent. We evaluate this by fitting a sweep of DisRNNs in a configuration that is optimized for discovery of a single strong model rather than for efficiently identifying a set of reasonable models (see Appendix A.3 for details), then by evaluating the discovered model. Leaky Actor-Critic Q-Learning 

Figure 5: ATLAS is competitive with expert-designed experiments. We compare 8 independent runs for ATLAS, 10 runs for expert-designed on Q-learning, and 10 runs for expert-designed on leaky actor-critic. (Left) Performance of the best-fitting models at predicting agent behavior in held-out experiments. Solid lines indicate the mean performance across independent runs, while the shaded regions represent ±1 standard error of the mean (SEM) Asterisks indicate a significant advantage of ATLAS over expert-designed experiments ( p < 0.05 , Welch’s one-tailed t-test). The horizontal dashed line represents the performance ceiling. (Middle) The probability of recovering the true underlying computational graph. Solid lines denote the fraction of successful recoveries. Shaded regions represent the 68% Wilson score interval. Asterisks indicate significance ( p < 0.05 , one-tailed Barnards’s exact test). (Right) Averaged state prediction error for the ground truth agent simulated in the model and vice versa. Asterisks indicate significance ( p < 0.05 , Welch’s one-tailed t-test). We consider three criteria of strong mechanistic models. The first is behavioral similarity : its behavior should be quantitatively like that of the system. We measure this using a test dataset of behavior from the ground-truth agent on a battery of handcrafted experiments designed to expose key patterns (see Appendix A.4 for details). We quantify the likelihood of this test dataset under the model. For strong models, this likelihood will approach that of the ground-truth agent itself. We find that ATLAS achieves high behavioral similarity with remarkable efficiency: after only 100 ATLAS-designed experiments, its performance nearly matches that of random search after 1,000 steps. Furthermore, when comparing equal milestones, ATLAS yields significantly higher behavioral similarity than random search after just 20 experiments for Q-learning, and after 100 experiments for Actor-Critic (Figure 1, left). The second criterion is structural similarity : whether there exists a 1:1 mapping between the compo-nents of the model and the components of the system. We represent the structure of each ground truth agent as a directed graph in which nodes are input variables (previous choice, previous reward), latent variables (for Q-learning: action values; for Leaky Actor-Critic: state value and policy parameters) or output variables (probability of next choice), and directed edges connect variables that causally affect one another (Figures 7 and 8). Similarly, a computational graph can be extracted from a fit DisRNN by examining the information bottlenecks, which encourage causal sparsity [ 6]. The nodes of this graph are similarly input variables, internal variables (activities of individual network units) and output variables, connected by directed edges when those variables are connected in the network by open information bottlenecks. After training the DisRNN parameters, including the fitted noise σ

8for each bottleneck, we threshold the bottlenecks to be either “open” (information passes) if σ < . 5

or “closed” (no information passes) otherwise. This thresholded DisRNN is structurally similar to the ground truth agent when their computational graphs are isomorphic. We find that ATLAS succeeds in recovering the correct computational graph for 8/8 seeds after 100 experiments for both the Q-learning and Leaky Actor-Critic agents. For the Q-learning agent, both the random and the expert-designed baselines required 1,000 experiments to reach this performance (Figure 1, middle; Figure 5, middle). For the Actor-Critic agent, the random baseline achieved this in 1,000 experiments, while the expert-designed baseline never achieved it. The third and final criterion is dynamical similarity . To measure this, we borrow a notion from theoretical computer science [ 53 , 54 ], which defines systems as computationally equivalent if they are able to perfectly simulate one another. This means that a one-to-one mapping exists from the states of one system to the states of the other. If a pair of computationally equivalent systems are initialized to corresponding states and given an identical sequence of inputs, the sequences of states that they trace out will correspond perfectly. This notion was defined for discrete systems, but has been generalized to continuous systems like ours as “approximate bisimulation” [ 55 , 56 ]. We quantify this by running the ground-truth system on a battery of held-out experiments, generating a dataset of their internal states, and training neural networks to map the states of the ground truth system to the states of the discovered models, and the other way around. We evaluate the quality of these mappings on a separate dataset of internal states, and report the normalized mean-squared errors averaged over the two simulation directions (see Appendix A.5 for details). On Q-learning, ATLAS’s bisimulation score after 100 steps matched that of random after 500 steps. On both Q-Learning and Leaky Actor-Critic, the bisimulation error was significantly lower for models trained on ATLAS-designed experiments, compared with random, after 100 experiments 1, right). These results hold for simulation error in each direction separately (Figure 9 in Appendix A.5). In line with the results on structure recovery, ATLAS was competitive with the expert-designed baseline on Q-learning, and even surpassed it on Actor-Critic, allowing for significantly lower bisimulation error by 100 experiments (Figure 5, right). 

# 5 Discussion 

We introduce ATLAS, a pipeline for discovering mechanistic models through interpretable experi-mental design. Uniquely, ATLAS drives its optimal experimental design and ensemble-based active learning using a class of data-driven interpretable models. We compare ATLAS to random experimen-tation on the problem of recovering the ground truth structure of reinforcement learning agents, and find that ATLAS is able to successfully recover mechanistic models that behaviorally, structurally, and computationally match the ground truth using an order of magnitude fewer experiments. We observe that ATLAS selects intriguingly structured experiments that bear only slight resemblance to the kind of experiments researchers employ. Finally, we compare to a class of expert-designed experiments and find that ATLAS closely matches or outperforms that baseline. While ATLAS is a general framework, we focused on the problem setting of recovering reinforcement learning algorithms for a few reasons. First, understanding the response of humans and animals (and artificial agents) to positive feedback is a problem of scientific, clinical, and societal importance, and one that has been a longstanding problem in cognitive science [ 57 , 46 ]. Second, and more pragmatically, there has been substantial work developing data-driven interpretable modeling to reward-guided learning behaviors [ 22 , 8, 10 , 12 ]. As our method relies crucially on such models, it makes sense to test in a domain where these models have been well tested. Third, we wanted to test our method on problems with a known ground truth before extending to unknown systems. Future work with ATLAS would include applying it to domains outside of reinforcement learning and to experimental data collection in real world settings. There are a number of limitations to the methodology in its present form. In our setup, the rate-limiting step is training ensemble models, as these models are trained from scratch on each step. Future work might consider finetuning approaches that update the existing ensembles more efficiently. Using ATLAS with different methods for interpretable modeling also merit future work [ 8, 10 ]. ATLAS uses an evolutionary approach to selects experiments greedily with respect to the EIG objective. Future work might optimize a batch of experiments [ 58 ], or leverage RL to maximize cumulative 

information gain [ 59 ]. Although optimizing sequences of experiments is computationally expensive, amortization [33] makes non-myopic design practical. 9Accelerating data collection is a vital challenge given the ubiquity of data-driven modeling in AI. In many lines of scientific investigation, within and beyond cognitive science, data collection is the rate-limiting step, owing to the time and cost of real-world interventions. Our work addresses this for the problem of experimentally distinguishing and optimizing interpretable mechanistic models as opposed to blackbox predictive models. Such models play a vital role in cognitive science and beyond for instantiating specific, high-level hypotheses about the underlying mechanisms driving observed scientific process. Our work is an important step for developing methods that accelerate the design of experiments that optimally uncover information about the underlying process while maintaining structure and interpretability. 

# Acknowledgments 

We thank Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, Diana Borsa, Bernardo Avila Pires, Kalesha Bullard, and Martin Engelcke for helpful discussions, and the rest of the Neuroscience Lab and Agency Team at Google DeepMind for the supportive research environment. We also thank Will Dabney and Hado van Hasselt for providing feedback on earlier versions of the manuscript. 

# References 

[1] George E. P. Box. Science and statistics. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 71 (356):791–799, 1976. [2] Mayank Agrawal, Joshua C Peterson, and Thomas L Griffiths. Scaling up psychology via scientific regret minimization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(16): 8825–8835, 2020. [3] Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu, Payal Chandak, Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, et al. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature , 620(7972):47–60, 2023. [4] Sebastian Musslick, Laura K. Bartlett, Suyog H. Chandramouli, Marina Dubova, Fernand Gobet, Thomas L. Griffiths, Jessica Hullman, Ross D. King, J. Nathan Kutz, Christopher G. Lucas, Suhas Mahesh, Franco Pestilli, Sabina J. Sloman, and William R. Holmes. Automating the practice of science: Opportunities, challenges, and implications. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(5):e2401238121, 2025. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2401238121. URL 

https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2401238121 .[5] Akshay K Jagadish, Milena Rmus, Kristin Witte, Marvin Mathony, Marcel Binz, and Eric Schulz. Can we automatize scientific discovery in the cognitive sciences? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20988 , 2026. [6] Kevin Miller, Maria Eckstein, Matt Botvinick, and Zeb Kurth-Nelson. Cognitive model discovery via disentangled rnns. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 61377–61394, 2023. [7] Manuel Brenner, Christoph Jürgen Hemmer, Zahra Monfared, and Daniel Durstewitz. Almost-linear rnns yield highly interpretable symbolic codes in dynamical systems reconstruction. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:36829–36868, 2024. [8] Li Ji-An, Marcus K Benna, and Marcelo G Mattar. Discovering cognitive strategies with tiny recurrent neural networks. Nature , 644(8078):993–1001, 2025. [9] Milena Rmus, Akshay K. Jagadish, Marvin Mathony, Tobias Ludwig, and Eric Schulz. Gen-erating computational cognitive models using large language models, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2502.00879 .[10] Pablo Samuel Castro, Nenad Tomasev, Ankit Anand, Navodita Sharma, Rishika Mohanta, Aparna Dev, Kuba Perlin, Siddhant Jain, Kyle Levin, Noemi Elteto, Will Dabney, Alexander Novikov, Glenn C Turner, Maria K Eckstein, Nathaniel D. Daw, Kevin J Miller, and Kim Stachenfeld. Discovering symbolic cognitive models from human and animal behavior. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, 10 Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu, editors, Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 6849– 6890. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/castro25a. html .[11] Kyle J LaFollette, Janni Yuval, Roey Schurr, David Melnikoff, and Amit Goldenberg. Data-driven equation discovery reveals nonlinear reinforcement learning in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(31):e2413441122, 2025. [12] Maria K Eckstein, Christopher Summerfield, Nathaniel D Daw, and Kevin J Miller. Hybrid neural–cognitive models reveal how memory shapes human reward learning. Nature Human Behaviour , pages 1–16, 2026. [13] Daniel Kasenberg, Pablo Samuel Castro, Maria K Eckstein, Noemi Elteto, Will Dabney, Car-oline L Wang, Martin Engelcke, Rishika Mohanta, Aparna Dev, Matthew M Botvinick, et al. Ai-discovered cognitive models reveal novel insights into human and animal learning. bioRxiv ,pages 2026–05, 2026. [14] Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. 2009. [15] Xun Huan, Jayanth Jagalur, and Youssef Marzouk. Optimal experimental design: Formulations and computations. Acta Numerica , 33:715–840, 2024. ISSN 1474-0508. doi: 10.1017/ s0962492924000023. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0962492924000023 .[16] Jay I Myung and Mark A Pitt. Optimal experimental design for model discrimination. Psycho-logical review , 116(3):499, 2009. [17] Daniel R Cavagnaro, Jay I Myung, Mark A Pitt, and Janne V Kujala. Adaptive design opti-mization: A mutual information-based approach to model discrimination in cognitive science. 

Neural computation , 22(4):887–905, 2010. [18] Peiyu Liu, Kevin J. Miller, and Hyojung Seo. Discovering cognitive models in a competitive mixed-strategy game. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN) , Boston, MA, USA, 2024. URL https://2024.ccneuro.org/pdf/ 68_Paper_authored_Liu-et-al-CCN2024-authored.pdf .[19] Siddhant Jain, Nathaniel D. Daw, Kimberly L. Stachenfeld, and Kevin J. Miller. Simulta-neous modeling of behavior and dopamine with disentangled RNNs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN) , Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2025. URL https://2025.ccneuro.org/abstract_pdf/Jain_2025_Simultaneous_ modeling_behavior_dopamine_disentangled_RNNs.pdf .[20] Isabelle Hoxha and Anne E. Urai. Uncovering the structure of trial-to-trial variability in per-ceptual decision-making using disentangled recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN) , Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2025. URL https://2025.ccneuro.org/abstract_pdf/Hoxha_2025_Uncovering_ Structure_Trial-to-Trial_Variability_Perceptual_Decision-Making.pdf .[21] Xinyue Zhu and Daniel L. Kimmel. Disentangling interpretable cognitive variables that support human generalization. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Interpreting Cognition in Deep Learning Models (CogInterp) , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyfwJjytjB .[22] Kevin J Miller, Matthew M Botvinick, and Carlos D Brody. From predictive models to cognitive models: an analysis of rat behavior in the two-armed bandit task. BioRxiv , page 461129, 2018. [23] H Sebastian Seung, Manfred Opper, and Haim Sompolinsky. Query by committee. In Pro-ceedings of the fifth annual workshop on Computational learning theory , pages 287–294, 1992. [24] Yoav Freund, H Sebastian Seung, Eli Shamir, and Naftali Tishby. Information, prediction, and query by committee. Advances in neural information processing systems , 5, 1992. [25] Ido Dagan and Sean P Engelson. Committee-based sampling for training probabilistic classifiers. In Machine learning proceedings 1995 , pages 150–157. Elsevier, 1995. 11 [26] Andrew Kachites McCallum, Kamal Nigam, et al. Employing em and pool-based active learning for text classification. In ICML , pages 350–358, 1998. [27] Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745 , 2011. [28] Elizabeth G Ryan, Christopher C Drovandi, James M McGree, and Anthony N Pettitt. A review of modern computational algorithms for bayesian optimal design. International Statistical Review , 84(1):128–154, 2016. [29] Tom Rainforth, Adam Foster, Desi R Ivanova, and Freddie Bickford Smith. Modern bayesian experimental design. Statistical Science , 39(1):100–114, 2024. [30] Dennis V Lindley. On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 27(4):986–1005, 1956. [31] David JC MacKay. Information-based objective functions for active data selection. Neural computation , 4(4):590–604, 1992. [32] Kathryn Chaloner and Isabella Verdinelli. Bayesian experimental design: A review. Statistical science , pages 273–304, 1995. [33] Adam Foster, Desi R Ivanova, Ilyas Malik, and Tom Rainforth. Deep adaptive design: Amortiz-ing sequential bayesian experimental design. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 3384–3395. PMLR, 2021. [34] Andreas Kirsch and Yarin Gal. Unifying approaches in active learning and active sampling via fisher information and information-theoretic quantities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.00549 , 2022. [35] Turab Lookman, Prasanna V Balachandran, Dezhen Xue, and Ruihao Yuan. Active learning in materials science with emphasis on adaptive sampling using uncertainties for targeted design. 

npj Computational Materials , 5(1):21, 2019. [36] Manfred K Warmuth, Jun Liao, Gunnar Rätsch, Michael Mathieson, Santosh Putta, and Christian Lemmen. Active learning with support vector machines in the drug discovery process. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences , 43(2):667–673, 2003. [37] Atılım Güne¸ s Baydin, Kyle Cranmer, Pablo de Castro Manzano, Christophe Delaere, Denis Derkach, Julien Donini, Tommaso Dorigo, Andrea Giammanco, Jan Kieseler, Lukas Layer, et al. Toward machine learning optimization of experimental design. Nuclear Physics News , 31 (1):25–28, 2021. [38] Prakhar Godara, Frederick Callaway, and Marcelo G Mattar. Adversarial construction as a potential solution to the experiment design problem in large task spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03172 , 2026. [39] Jay I Myung, Daniel R Cavagnaro, and Mark A Pitt. A tutorial on adaptive design optimization. 

Journal of mathematical psychology , 57(3-4):53–67, 2013. [40] Long Ouyang, Michael Henry Tessler, Daniel Ly, and Noah Goodman. Practical optimal experiment design with probabilistic programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.05046 , 2016. [41] Marina Dubova, Arseny Moskvichev, and Kevin Zollman. Against theory-motivated experi-mentation: Can random experimental choice lead to better theories? Collective Intelligence , 5, 2026. [42] Sebastian Musslick, Joshua TS Hewson, Benjamin W Andrew, Younes Strittmatter, Chad C Williams, George T Dang, Marina Dubova, and John Gerrard Holland. An evaluation of experimental sampling strategies for autonomous empirical research in cognitive science. In 

Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society , volume 45, 2023. [43] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 12 [44] Anne Gabrielle Eva Collins. Reinforcement learning: bringing together computation and cognition. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 29:63–68, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha. 2019.04.011. [45] Maria Eckstein, Linda Wilbrecht, and Anne Collins. What do reinforcement learning models measure? interpreting model parameters in cognition and neuroscience. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 41:128–137, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.06.004. [46] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction . The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, second edition, 2018. [47] Saurabh Rajendra Nirantar. Directed evolution methods for enzyme engineering. Molecules , 26 (18):5599, 2021. [48] Fabien Vincent, Arsenio Nueda, Jonathan Lee, Monica Schenone, Marco Prunotto, and Mark Mercola. Phenotypic drug discovery: recent successes, lessons learned and new directions. 

Nature Reviews Drug Discovery , 21(12):899–914, 2022. [49] E J Chichilnisky. A simple white noise analysis of neuronal light responses. Network , 12(2): 199–213, 2001. [50] John Widloski, Michael P Marder, and Ila R Fiete. Inferring circuit mechanisms from sparse neural recording and global perturbation in grid cells. Elife , 7:e33503, 2018. [51] Nathaniel D Daw, John P O’doherty, Peter Dayan, Ben Seymour, and Raymond J Dolan. Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions in humans. Nature , 441(7095):876–879, 2006. [52] Mark E Walton, Timothy EJ Behrens, Mark J Buckley, Peter H Rudebeck, and Matthew FS Rushworth. Separable learning systems in the macaque brain and the role of orbitofrontal cortex in contingent learning. Neuron , 65(6):927–939, 2010. [53] John E. Savage. Models of Computation: Exploring the Power of Computing . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1998. [54] Edmund M. Clarke Jr, Orna Grumberg, Daniel Kroening, Doron Peled, and Helmut Veith. 

Model Checking . MIT Press, 2018. [55] Antoine Girard and George J Pappas. Approximate bisimulation: A bridge between computer science and control theory. European Journal of Control , 17(5-6):568–578, 2011. [56] Vladimir Mikulik, Grégoire Delétang, Tom McGrath, Tim Genewein, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Pedro Ortega. Meta-trained agents implement bayes-optimal agents. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:18691–18703, 2020. [57] Yael Niv. Reinforcement learning in the brain. Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 53(3):139– 154, 2009. ISSN 0022-2496. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2008.12.005. URL https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022249608001181 . Special Issue: Dynamic Decision Making. [58] Andreas Kirsch, Joost Van Amersfoort, and Yarin Gal. Batchbald: Efficient and diverse batch acquisition for deep bayesian active learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [59] Neythen J. Treloar, Nathan Braniff, Brian Ingalls, and Chris P. Barnes. Deep reinforcement learning for optimal experimental design in biology. PLOS Computational Biology , 18(11):1–24, 11 2022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010695. URL https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pcbi.1010695 .[60] William H Beluch, Tim Genewein, Andreas Nürnberger, and Jan M Köhler. The power of ensembles for active learning in image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9368–9377, 2018. [61] Amir Dezfouli, Richard Nock, and Peter Dayan. Adversarial vulnerabilities of human decision-making. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(46):29221–29228, 2020. 13 A Appendix 

A.1 Robustness of Experiment Optimizer 

We analyzed the robustness of the Experiment Optimizer on the example problem of distinguishing two Q-learning agents with different learning rates: QMedium with learning rate α = 0 .2 and QVery Slow 

with learning rate α = 0 .05 (corresponding to the first pair of agents shown in 3). In this analysis, we evolved 1,000 independent samples starting from different seeds. All samples converged within 

2,000 steps. Within 10 subsets of 100 independent samples (considered as ’run’ in our analysis), the best EIG score converges to the same value within < 0.1% coefficient of variation. The best experiments on the 10 runs show remarkable consistency: they are arm-invariant versions of the same qualitative design. Each of the 10 best experiments has a partially-overlapping block structure, in which first only one choice is rewarding, then both are, then only the other choice is rewarding, then both are again, and finally only the first. Each optimal experiment includes several anomalous trials which deviate from the block structure. This confirms that 100 samples are sufficient for robust convergence in this problem setting. 

Figure 6: Robustness of optimized experiments for Q-Learners with different learning rates. We optimized binary reward matrices to distinguish a QMedium with learning rate α = 0 .2 from QVery Slow 

with α = 0 .05 . (Left) The expected information gain (EIG) converges in < 2,000 evolution timesteps. Each line corresponds to one of 1,000 optimization runs, and different colors indicate subsets of 100 runs. Thick lines are the best experiment from each subset as evaluated on separate batches 

B = 2 × 1024 , and crosses represent the score of this experiment on an additional, larger batch 

B′ = 10 × 1024 . Vertical lines represent convergence checks. (Right) Each panel displays the best optimized experiment from each subset of the runs. Experiments consist of a binary reward matrix where gray indicates that a reward of 1 will be given, and white indicates a reward of 0. Superimposed on each experiment is a batch of N = 100 trajectories generated from each agent, with the action probabilities from QVery Slow in pink, and from QMedium in burgundy. The subsets identify highly similar experiments, with a partially overlapping reward block design. 

A.2 Agents 

The data generating agents used in our experiments were two simple reinforcement learning agents a Q-learning agent and an actor-critic agent [46]. 

A.2.1 Q-Learning Agent 

The Q-learning agent maintains a latent variable Q associated with each available action, and updates these following a reward according to: 

Qt+1 (at) = (1 − α)Qt(at) + αr t (3) and 

Qt+1 (a̸ = at) = Qt(a̸ = at) (4) where α is a learning rate parameter set to α = 0 .1. The Q-learning agent makes choices according to: 

at ∼ Softmax (βQ t) (5) where β is a softmax inverse temperature parameter controlling the degree of randomness in decision-making (set to β = 5 ). 14 Figure 7: The computational graph of Q-learning. Viewed as a computational graph, the Q-learning agent with A = 2 has two input nodes (previous choice and previous reward), two internal state nodes (Q1 and Q2) and one output node (next choice probability). This computational graph is moderately sparse: both inputs directly affect only two state variables, and those state variables directly affect the output but not each other. 

A.2.2 Leaky Actor-Critic Agent 

The leaky actor-critic agent maintains a set of action preferences θ for each available action, updated via a gradient bandit algorithm with a forgetting mechanism, as well as a running estimate of the recent reward rate, v.The critic updates its value estimate v following a reward rt according to: 

vt+1 = (1 − αc)vt + αcrt

where αc is the critic’s learning rate parameter, which we set to αc = 0 .3.This value serves as a baseline to compute the reward prediction error: 

δt = rt − vt

The actor makes choices based on its current preferences θt by applying a softmax function to determine the probability of choosing action a:

πt(a) = exp( θt(a)) 

P 

> a′

exp( θt(a′)) 

Following an action at, the preferences are updated using the prediction error δt, an actor learning rate αa (set to αa = 1 .0), and a forgetting rate parameter αf (set to αf = 0 .05 ). The preference for the chosen action at is updated according to: 

θt+1 (at) = (1 − αf )θt(at) + αaδt(1 − πt(at)) 

and for the unchosen action a̸ = at:

θt+1 (a̸ = at) = (1 − αf )θt(a̸ = at) − αaδtπt(a̸ = at)

Figure 8: The computational graph of Leaky Actor-Critic. Viewed as a computational graph, the leaky actor-critic agent with A = 2 has two input nodes (previous choice and previous reward), two internal state nodes (the critic, denoted by z0, which depends on previous reward only, and the actor, denoted by z1, which depends on the critic, the previous reward, and the previous action) and one output node affected only by the critic (next choice probability). 

A.3 DisRNN Hyperparameters and Fitting A.3.1 In ATLAS 

On every ATLAS cycle, we train DisRNNs on a range of hyperparameters to generate candidate models, which are then filtered to produce the ensemble. Specifically, we fit a total of 128 networks sweeping the DisRNN penalty parameter β between between 10 −4 and 10 −1 and fitting four networks with different random seeds for each level of the penalty. We train the networks for 10,000 steps. 15 We evaluate each set of hyperparameters by computing a two-fold cross-validated likelihood score 

Lcv . We then obtain a single model for each set of hyperparameters by fitting a new network to the entire dataset. This results in a large set of models with very different tradeoffs between quality-of-fit and simplicity (Figure 10). 

A.3.2 In evaluation 

To find the best-fitting model given a dataset produced by ATLAS, we fit a total of 64 networks sweeping the DisRNN penalty parameter β between between 10 −5 and 10 −1 and fitting two networks with different random seeds for each level of the penalty. We train the networks for 100,000 steps. Similarly to our model selection strategy within ATLAS, the best-fitting model is obtained by first selecting the set of hyperparameters that score highest in Lcv , and then fitting a network to the entire dataset using those hyperparameters. 

A.4 Battery of Held-out Experiments 

The held-out test set consists of a comprehensive grid of two-armed drifting bandit tasks. To ensure a robust evaluation across diverse environmental volatilities and learning timescales, the battery is generated by sweeping across combinations of initial reward probabilities, Gaussian random walk drift rates, and random seeds. Specifically, we generate a grid consisting of 6 linearly spaced initial reward probabilities between 0 and 1 for each of the two arms, 6 drift rates uniformly spaced between 0 and 0.3, and 6 random seed instantiations per combination. This yields a diverse suite of 1,296 unique experiments. 

A.5 Bisimulation Analyses 

We compute a bisimulation score for each of our discovered models by first learning mappings between their internal states and those of the ground-truth models. For this training phase, we simulate the ground-truth agent on the battery of heldout experiments (Appendix A.4) to extract a trajectory of latents states, as well as to generate a dataset actions and rewards. We then pass the dataset of actions and rewards to the discovered model to extract its corresponding latent states. Q-Learning 

# Leaky Actor-Critic 

Figure 9: Sample efficiency on bisimulation for ATLAS-designed versus random experiments .We compare 8 independent runs of ATLAS to 10 runs of random experimentation. (Left) State prediction MSE for the ground truth agent (GT; Q-learning or Leaky Actor-Critic) simulated in the model. (Right) State prediction MSE for the discovered model simulated in the ground truth. Asterisks indicate significance ( p < 0.05 , Welch’s one-tailed t-test). Next, we train two small feedforward neural networks: one to map the discovered model’s state (e.g., recurrent unit activations) onto the ground-truth agent’s state (e.g., Q-values), and the other 16 to map the ground-truth agent’s state onto the discovered model’s state. Both mapping networks are multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) comprising 8 hidden layers with 32 hidden units each. These networks are trained with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 for 5,000 steps. Once these mappings are trained, we can "simulate" one system within the other: mapping an initial state across systems, applying the target’s transition dynamics, and mapping the predicted states back. To evaluate fidelity, we generate 10 independent 32-timestep evaluation sequences and record the state traces for both systems.To ensure our evaluation is symmetric and invariant to the scale of different state spaces, we compute the final bisimulation score bidirectionally. First, we calculate the raw mean squared error (MSE) between the true and predicted traces in both directions (the discoevred model simulated in the ground-truth model and vice versa), averaged across time and state dimensions. We then normalize each raw MSE by dividing it by the mean standard deviation of its target system’s states (computed across the time and batch dimensions, and bounded below by 

10 −8 to prevent division by zero). The final bisimulation score is the arithmetic mean of these two normalized MSEs (Figure 9), yielding a balanced, scale-invariant measure of algorithmic equivalence between the systems. 

A.6 Softmax Ensemble Sampling 

Default ATLAS explores hypotheses by sampling from an offset softmax distribution over the cross-validated scores. Let M denote the candidate models generated in Section 3.3. For each model mi ∈ M with a normalized cross-validation likelihood Lcv  

> i

, we compute the weight: 

wi = 1 + exp 

 Lcv  

> i

− cτ



(6) where the baseline c = 0 .5 is set to match at-chance performance, and the temperature τ is a hyperparameter that controls the sharpness of the distribution. The +1 floor acts as a uniform mixture prior, guaranteeing a non-zero selection probability for the lowest-performing models. We then use the distribution pi = wi/ P 

> j∈M

wj to sample K models from M without replacement, forming our final ensemble E. In our experiments we set a low temperature of τ = 0 .01 .The rationale behind the offset softmax sampling is to focus experiment design on distinguishing the best models unless there are too few experiments to support any good models. The softmax rule implements this principle, effectively exploring more among the many overfit models on early cycles and preferring the top-scoring models on late cycles (Figure 10). 

A.6.1 Robustness to Ensemble Selection Strategies 

The Active Learning literature describes a variety of ensemble selection heuristics, yet identifying the optimal approach for a given application remains an open challenge. We evaluated ATLAS’s sensitivity to the ensemble selection strategy against other approaches adapted from the this literature on Q-learning agent recovery. Alongside ATLAS’s default sampling softmax strategy, we evaluated a uniform sampling strategy, which effectively yields a discrete approximation of the Bayesian posterior necessary for information-theoretic acquisition functions like BALD [ 60 , 27 ]. Furthermore, we evaluated a top-k selection strategy, which acts as a practical proxy for sampling from the version space in Query-by-Committee approaches [23]. Overall, there was no significant difference among the three different strategies when testing the hypothesis that at least one of the strategies differed from the others, on any of the three metrics (all p > 0.05 , One-Way ANOVA and Chi-Square tests). However, BALD-ATLAS converged on the ground truth earlier and by 50 experiments, it had a significant advantage over the default softmax-ATLAS, as revealed by Welch’s one-tailed t-test ( p < 0.05 ). This is a positive indication of ATLAS’s robustness to different ensemble selection strategies. 

A.6.2 ATLAS with GRU ensembles 

In order to better understand the effect of DisRNNs models on experimental design, we replaced the DisRNN models in the ensemble with vanilla gated recurrent units (GRUs), class of models shown to be effective at learning behavior models [ 61 ]. We induced diversity in the pool of candidate 17 Figure 10: Examples of early exploration using softmax ensemble selection. (Left) The perfor-mance of the entire sweep of networks is plotted. The dashed line represents the unity line. Shades of green mark membership to one of the computational graph clusters that make up 80% of the networks. (Other networks belonging to graph clusters with low counts are marked in gray). Darker shades mark higher average cross-validated normalized likelihood within the cluster. The two chosen ensemble members are marked in pink and burgundy and indicated with arrows. (Right) The set of unique graphs that cluster 80% of the networks is shown in decreasing order of their cross-validated normalized likelihood, and the two chosen ensemble members are marked in pink and burgundy. In effect, softmax ensemble selection explores more on early cycles when models are closer to chance performance (Top), and more greedily later when more models have better performance (Bottom), as is evident in the selection of high-performing models nearer the start of the list later in training. 10 1 10 2   

> # experiments
> 0.58
> 0.59
> 0.60
> Norm. Likelihood
> Test Experiments
> Discovered Models
> Match Behavior
> softmax-ATLAS
> top-k-ATLAS
> uniform-ATLAS
> 10 110 2
> # experiments
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> Fraction of Runs
> Discovered Models
> Match Computational Structure
> 10 110 2
> # experiments
> 10 2
> Simulation Error
> Discovered Models
> Match Computational Dynamics

Figure 11: ATLAS performance is robust to ensemble selection strategies. On the task of recovering the Q-learning agent, the differences among the three ensemble selection strategies were not significant on any metric (all p > 0.05 , One-Way ANOVA and Chi-Square tests). models, and therefore in the ensembles, by sweeping the number of hidden layer units from 1 to 32, analogously to the effect of sweeping the penalty of DisRNNs. Experiments designed by GRU-ATLAS show far less temporal structure (quantified by sequence entropy, see Appendix A.6.3) than those designed by DisRNN-ATLAS (Figure 12). GRU-ATLAS was also assessed in terms of its sample efficiency for recovering mechanistic models by fitting DisRNNs – that is, while GRUs formed the ensembles for experiment design, DisRNNs were trained and evaluated on the data from those experiments. In terms of performance, GRU-ATLAS 18 Figure 12: DisRNN-ATLAS designs more structured experiments than GRU-ATLAS. (Left) 

There is a marked and stable difference in the sequential entropy of experiments designed by GRU-ATLAS and DisRNN-ATLAS across 8 seeds. (Right) Example experiments and simulated trajectories from the two ensemble members are shown from the first 10 experiments on an arbitrarily chosen seed (seed 2) for GRU-ATLAS (Top) and DisRNN-ATLAS (Bottom). underperformed DisRNN-ATLAS albeit not significantly, except for a small performance decrement in terms of generalization (Figure 13). Leaky Actor-Critic Q-Learning 

> DisRNN-ATLAS GRU-ATLAS

Figure 13: GRU-ATLAS is on par with DisRNN-ATLAS . We compare 8 independent runs of GRU-ATLAS and DisRNN-ATLAS on recovering Q-learning (Top) and leaky actor-critic (Bottom). 

(Left) Performance of the best-fitting models at predicting agent behavior in held-out experiments. Solid lines indicate the mean performance across independent runs, while the shaded regions represent 

±1 standard error of the mean (SEM). Asterisks indicate significant advantage of DisRNN-ATLAS over GRU-ATLAS ( p < 0.05 , of Welch’s one-tailed t-test). The horizontal dashed line represents the performance ceiling. (Middle) The probability of recovering the true underlying computational graph. Solid lines denote the fraction of successful recoveries on 8 seeds. Shaded regions represent the 68% 

Wilson score interval. No significant differences were found (all p > 0.05 , one-tailed Barnard’s exact test). (Right) State prediction MSE for the ground truth agent simulated in the model. No significant differences were found (all p > 0.05 , Welch’s one-tailed t-test). 

A.6.3 Experiment Entropy 

We quantified the first-order temporal structure in our experiment designs. Given a T × A design matrix D, we calculated the conditional entropy of a reward given the immediately preceding reward for each action, averaged across all A actions. The average sequential entropy is defined as: 

Hseq = 1

A

> A

X

> a=1

H(Dt+1 (a) | Dt(a)) 

19 where the conditional entropy for a given action’s reward sequence is calculated using the empirical joint and marginal probabilities of successive reward pairs: 

H(Dt+1 (a) | Dt(a)) = − X

> Dt∈{ 0,1}

X

> Dt+1 ∈{ 0,1}

P (Dt, Dt+1 ) log 2

 P (Dt, Dt+1 )

P (Dt)



P (Dt, Dt+1 ) and P (Dt) refer to the empirical probabilities computed over the T timesteps for action a.

A.7 Compute resources 

On each cycle, an ATLAS run involves fitting 128 neural networks (32 penalty values and 4 seeds) and evolving experiments on 128 trajectories started from 128 different seeds. Each set of 8 independent ATLAS runs presented in the results requires a total of 1028 workers. One ATLAS cycle of generating novel hypotheses and designing an experiment takes ∼ 30 to ∼ 60 minutes. In our experiments, we ran ATLAS closed-loop for 100 cycles in ∼ 48 to ∼ 96 hours. 20