Title: An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24266v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 00:26:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Lin Ai 1 2 Victor S. Bursztyn 2 Xiang Chen 2 Julia Hirschberg 1 Saayan Mitra 2

## Abstract 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled deep research systems that synthesize comprehensive, report-style answers to open-ended queries by combining retrieval, rea-soning, and generation. Yet most frameworks rely on rigid workflows with one-shot scoping and long autonomous runs, offering little room for course correction if user intent shifts mid-process. We present STE ER , a framework for St eerable deE p Research that introduces interpretable, mid-process control into long-horizon research work-flows. At each decision point, STE ER uses a cost–benefit formulation to determine whether to pause for user input or to proceed autonomously. It combines diversity-aware planning with utility signals that reward alignment, novelty, and cov-erage, and maintains a live persona model that evolves throughout the session. STE ER outper-forms state-of-the-art open-source and proprietary baselines by up to 22.80% on alignment, leads on quality metrics such as breadth and balance, and is preferred by human readers in 85%+ of pair-wise alignment judgments. We also introduce a persona–query benchmark and data-generation pipeline. To our knowledge, this is the first work to advance deep research with an interactive, inter-pretable control paradigm, paving the way for con-trollable, user-aligned agents in long-form tasks. 

## 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have shifted information access from ranked retrieval to systems that generate comprehensive, report-style answers to com-plex and open-ended queries (Du et al., 2025). These deep research systems, spanning proprietary platforms (Google, 

> 1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 2Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA. Correspon-dence to: Lin Ai <lin.ai@cs.columbia.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

2024; OpenAI, 2025; xAI, 2025) and open-source frame-works (Elovic, 2025; LangChain, 2025), combine itera-tive retrieval with multi-step reasoning to synthesize well-supported outputs (Coelho et al., 2025).Benchmarks such as DeepResearchGym (Coelho et al., 2025) and DeepRe-search Bench (Du et al., 2025) have begun to standardize this setting, providing realistic research-style questions and au-tomated evaluation protocols for long-form, citation-heavy reports. However, these benchmarks evaluate research-style queries and long-form reports against generic quality criteria; they do not provide persona-conditioned, aspect-grounded targets needed to measure alignment and focus when a system is meant to adapt to an individual user. This leaves a gap for evaluating interactive, user-steerable research agents, which we address with a persona-query suite that pairs deep-research-worthy queries with query-conditioned personas and actionable aspect checklists. On the system side, current deep research agents largely fall into two paradigms: multi-agent pipelines that divide plan-ning, search, and synthesis (Huang et al., 2025; Alzubi et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025a; Zhang et al., 2025a), and RL-trained agents that learn to search and reason effectively (Zheng et al., 2025b; Jin et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025). Yet, regard-less of architecture, most systems follow a rigid workflow: one-time scoping (often with a single clarification), followed by a long autonomous run. If user intent shifts mid-process, there is little room to course-correct, resulting in wasted cost and misaligned reports. This highlights the need for an alternative design where mid-process interaction is central, not optional. Two research threads closely relate to our work. Personal-ization and alignment examine how to tailor LLM outputs to user intent, from profile-conditioned generation (Wu et al., 2025) to long-form checklists (Salemi et al., 2024; Salemi & Zamani, 2025) and interactive preference elicitation. While these works show the value of personalization, most assume fixed personas or separate preference modeling from sys-tem control, lacking a principled way to determine when to seek input. Interactive reasoning investigates how LLMs ask clarifying questions (Andukuri et al.; Ren et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024), model future turns (Zhang et al., 2025b), or learn clarification policies (Chen et al., 2025). These methods address a local clarification bottleneck — detect-ing ambiguity in the current request and deciding whether 1

> arXiv:2605.24266v1 [cs.CL] 22 May 2026

An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research      

> System Mid-process steering Adaptive pause decision Live persona modeling
> Deep Research Framework (Open-Source)
> DeepResearcher (Zheng et al., 2025b)

✗ ✗ ✗  

> Search-r1 (Jin et al., 2025)

✗ ✗ ✗  

> ManuSearch (Huang et al., 2025)

✗ ✗ ✗  

> Search-o1 (Li et al., 2025a)

✗ ✗ ✗  

> GPT-Researcher (Elovic, 2025)

✗ ✗ ✗  

> Open Deep Research (LangChain, 2025)

◆ ✗ ✗  

> ERD (Prabhakar et al., 2025)

✓ ✗ ✗  

> Deep Research Framework (Proprietary Web-Based)
> OpenAI Deep Research (OpenAI, 2025)

◆ ✗ ✗  

> Google Gemini Deep Research (Google, 2024)

◆ ✗ ✗  

> Interactive/Persona-Aware Reasoning Frameworks
> PersonaAgent (Zhang et al., 2025c)

✗ ✗ ✓  

> ReasonGraph (Li et al., 2025b)

✓ ✗ ✗  

> HITL CoT MCS (Cai et al., 2023)

✓ ✗ ✗ 

> STE ER

✓ ✓ ✓

Table 1. Comparison of deep research frameworks (open-source and proprietary) and interactive/persona-aware reasoning frameworks in terms of mid-process steering via adaptive pause decisions and live persona modeling. To our knowledge, STE ER is the first benchmarkable deep-research framework that jointly offers all. 

to answer it directly or ask first — rather than an end-to-end policy over where to pause in a long-horizon trajectory, how pausing trades off against exploration, and how user goals should evolve mid-process. A complementary thread ex-poses reasoning traces for human inspection: I NTERACTIVE 

REASONING (Pang et al., 2025) renders chain-of-thought as an editable topic hierarchy, and R EASON GRAPH (Li et al., 2025c) visualizes sequential or tree-based reasoning paths. These tools improve transparency and oversight, but provide 

static visualization rather than an adaptive pause mechanism or live persona model that conditions planning, branch util-ity, and synthesis within a single long-horizon research tree. Existing approaches thus either optimize autonomous agents or isolate clarification as a narrow skill. In contrast, we aim to offer an integrated control paradigm that jointly governs pausing, exploration, and personalization mid-process. We introduce STE ER , a framework for St eerable d eE p

Research that brings interactive control to long-horizon research workflows (Figure 1). The key intuition is that deep research should occasionally ask , not just answer : STE ER 

uses a cost–benefit formulation at each decision point to determine whether to pause for user input or to proceed autonomously. To remain both user-aligned and exploratory, it combines diversity-aware planning with utility signals that reward alignment, novelty, and coverage. A live persona is continuously updated based on interactions and conditions all downstream planning, scoring, and synthesis, enabling the system to adjust as user needs evolve. Table 1 situates STE ER among deep research frameworks and interactive/persona-aware reasoning systems. Most deep research systems still do one-shot scoping followed by a long autonomous run: once a query is issued, a fixed pipeline executes to completion with no interpretable way to intervene in the research tree or to decide when to so-licit guidance ( ◆denotes a single upfront scoping/plan-confirmation step). Concurrent work, EDR (Prabhakar et al., 2025), adds user-initiated mid-process steering via an ex-posed task plan, but lacks an adaptive pause policy and live persona modeling. Interactive/persona-aware systems address complementary aspects: they maintain evolving user representations or expose reasoning for inspection and manual correction, but they do not implement an adaptive pause policy that decides where to pause and how to balance autonomy and control. In contrast, STE ER is, to our knowl-edge, the first benchmarkable deep research framework that jointly supports mid-process steering, an adaptive pause mechanism, and live persona modeling. Our contributions are as follows: • We propose STE ER , an interactive deep research frame-work that supports interpretable, mid-process control and dynamic user alignment throughout the research loop. • Extensive experiments show that STE ER outperforms the strongest open-source and proprietary OpenAI baselines on persona-tailoredness and report quality, while offering fine-grained control to tune trade-offs between alignment and user burden, as well as between under-exploration and over-personalization. A human study further confirms its preference among readers, with significant gains in alignment, focus, and usability. • We introduce a persona–query evaluation suite and a reusable data generation pipeline grounded in prior bench-marks, suitable for future evaluation and training of inter-active deep research agents. In summary, STE ER consistently outperforms strong open and proprietary baselines, achieving 7.83% –22 .80% higher alignment and leading on general quality metrics such as 2An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

breadth and balance. Human readers prefer STE ER in over 85% of alignment and 83% of focus pairwise compar-isons. To our knowledge, this is the first work to advance deep research with an interactive, interpretable control paradigm . We believe that this paradigm shift will shape future long-horizon research agents, enabling decision poli-cies that adapt to individual users and their evolving needs, rather than relying on a single upfront clarification. 

## 2. S TE ER 

2.1. Problem Setup and Objectives 

We formulate steerable deep research as an interactive plan-ning task. Given a user query Q, the system incrementally constructs a research tree and produces a cited synthesis report R. The goal is to generate a report that is both high-quality and aligned with the evolving preferences of the user, while keeping the number of interruptions minimal and well-timed. Each user is represented by a persona P = ( ptext , A), where 

ptext is a natural-language description combining profile and personality traits (following Wu et al. (2025)), and A is a set of aspects the user expects to see addressed in the final report. We evaluate reports along two complementary dimensions: (1) Alignment : the extent to which the report covers the aspects in A; and (2) Focus : the proportion of content that remains on-topic with respect to A.

2.2. System Overview 

Our framework STE ER transforms monolithic deep-research pipelines into an interactive process. The system is structured around three core components: diversity-aware exploration , pause decision , and persona modeling . At a high level, the framework incrementally builds a research tree that represents possible exploration paths and selec-tively engages the user at key checkpoints. We denote the research tree as T = ( N, E ), where each node n ∈ N represents a sub-problem query with partial research results and each edge (n, n ′) ∈ E indicates a decomposition into sub-directions. The tree expands level by level up to a maximum depth D, a hyper-parameter controlling how many layers are explored before synthesis. At each step, the system operates at a frontier node n⋆ and performs the following actions (Figure 1): 1. Diversity-aware exploration: Generate candidate follow-up directions from n⋆ and select a diversified subset of size K to serve as potential expansions (see the 

Planning panel in Figure 1). 2. Pause decision and expansion: Compute branch util-ities, execution costs, and the expected gain of asking, and compare this to the pause cost. If a pause occurs, present the diversified subset to the user and then ex-pand the user-selected items together with any newly suggested directions. Otherwise, expand the system-proposed diversified subset directly. Sub-agents then perform retrieval and reasoning at each expanded child to produce node-level reports (see the Pause Decision 

panel in Figure 1). 3. Persona modeling: Update the inferred persona ˆP with signals from the query, initial profile, and any user feed-back gathered during pauses. The updated persona con-ditions planning, utility scoring, and synthesis in subse-quent steps (see the Persona Modeling panel in Figure 1). The process terminates once all nodes at depth D have been expanded, at which point the accumulated node reports are aggregated into the final report R. This interactive loop enables reports that are better aligned with user goals while minimizing redundant or off-topic exploration. 

2.3. Diversity-Aware Exploration 

As described in Section 2.2, at each frontier node n⋆, the system generates a set of follow-up questions as potential next steps. To promote exploration and reduce redundancy, we explicitly prompt for distinct facets and include one 

wild-card direction (see Appendix K for prompt details). From this candidate set, we select a diversified subset of size K to either present to the user (if a pause is triggered) or expand automatically. To select this subset, we apply a greedy Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) strategy (Carbonell & Goldstein, 1998; Wang et al., 2025), which balances confidence scores with dissimilarity to previously chosen directions. MMR is par-ticularly well-suited to our setting: it is simple, efficient, and interpretable, while effectively encouraging topical cover-age across different aspects. In contrast, alternative diversity methods (e.g., clustering or determinantal point processes) introduce additional complexity and hyper-parameters with-out clear gains in this context. Appendix C provides the full algorithmic details. 

2.4. Pause Decision and Expansion 

After the proposal stage has produced a diversified set of candidates, the system must decide whether to involve the user or continue autonomously. Asking everywhere is unde-sirable: user tolerance for interruptions is limited and varies widely. Some users prefer high-level guidance while trusting the system to handle details; others are more detail-oriented but want control only in specific themes. Preferences also shift across the depth of the research tree and over time. A well-calibrated system must respect these preferences while steering the exploration toward the user’s goals. Below, we present the pause decision mechanism in a top-down structure: we begin with the overall decision rule and then 3An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research     

> Figure 1. Overview of STE ER . The upper panel shows the end-to-end pipeline. The lower panels zoom into the three core modules:
> Planning ,Pause Decision , and Persona Modeling .

unpack its components, including pause cost, expected gain, and branch utility. 

Decision rule At each frontier node n⋆, the system eval-uates whether pausing to ask the user is beneficial. This decision is framed as a cost–benefit comparison: 

a(n⋆) = 

(PAUSE ASK , ∆EV (n⋆) > C (n⋆),

PROCEED , otherwise. Here, ∆EV (n⋆) denotes the expected utility gain from pausing — by allowing the user to refine or redirect the next steps — while C(n⋆) denotes the cost of interruption, scaled by user-specific tolerance. 

Pause cost Not all users interact in the same way. To model this, we assume two things: (1) a user’s tolerance for interruptions decreases over time, and (2) users differ in how much interruption they are willing to tolerate in total, and how fast that tolerance depletes. To capture this, we introduce two hyper-parameters: • C0 ∈ [0 , 1] : the base pause cost . This reflects a user’s general sensitivity to interruptions. A lower C0 implies the user is open to frequent interaction; a higher C0

indicates a preference for minimal disruption. • Tol ∈ N: the tolerance budget . This governs how quickly the pause cost increases with the number of questions asked. Intuitively, Tol represents the ap-proximate number of clarification questions the user is comfortable answering across the entire session. A user may tolerate multiple clarifications within a single topic but become frustrated by interruptions scattered across too many unrelated ones. To reflect this, we distribute the global tolerance budget Tol across all active top-level direc-tions , defined as the root’s immediate children. While users may have different preferences across themes, we simplify by evenly dividing the tolerance budget across top-level directions. Each node n belongs to a top-level direction 

j ∈ K′, where K′ denotes the number of currently active directions. If the system proceeds automatically, K′ = K

(the full diversified set). If a pause occurs, K′ equals the number of user-selected plus user-added directions. The pause cost at a frontier node n⋆ is then computed as: 

C(n⋆) = C0 ·



1 + pauses j

Tol j



,

where pauses j is the number of times the system has pre-viously paused in direction j. As the number of pauses grows within a direction, the cost of pausing again increases proportionally. 

Pause gain The gain of pausing should reflect two factors: the utility we forgo by pruning branches and the execution cost we save by not pursuing them. Let {n⋆k}Kk=1 be the candidate children at the frontier node, with branch utilities U (n⋆k) and normalized execution costs 

Cexec (n⋆k). If we proceed automatically, we pursue all K,and the expected value of the frontier node without paus-ing is EV no -ask (n⋆) = PKk=1 U (n⋆k) − PKk=1 Cexec (n⋆k).If we pause, the user keeps a subset S ⊆ { 1, . . . , K },so the expected value of the frontier node with pause is 

EV ask (n⋆) = P 

> k∈S

U (n⋆k) − P 

> k∈S

Cexec (n⋆k). To esti-mate S, we retain candidates whose upper utility bound overlaps the leader’s lower bound, capturing all options that are plausibly optimal. Equivalently, this decision rule prunes all branches whose best-case utility still falls below the worst-case value of the current leader. See Appendix D for bound construction and filtering. A pause only changes which branches we do not execute. The gain of pausing at the frontier node is the saved cost 4An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

minus the lost utility of those pruned branches: 

∆EV (n⋆) = EV ask (n⋆) − EV no -ask (n⋆)= X

> k∈Sc

 −U (n⋆k) + Cexec (n⋆k).

Branch utility. We score each candidate child n⋆k using a weighted combination of three factors: 

U (n⋆k) = ∆Align( n⋆k) + λexp Explore( n⋆k)+ λinfo InfoGain( n⋆k),

where each component is scaled to [0 , 1] for direct compa-rability with the pause cost. (See Appendix D for exact computations and normalization.) • Alignment gain (∆Align ) computes predicted increase in persona alignment relative to the parent under the current inferred aspects ˆAs. It rewards branches that cover more of what the user actually cares about. • Exploration bonus (Explore ) adds a small reward for under-explored facets to discourage repeatedly selecting the same angle. We capture this “reward under-explored, penalize over-explored” behavior with a lightweight 

count-based bonus over facet tags , inspired by the Up-per Confidence Bound (UCB) family (Auer, 2002; Auer et al., 2002; Li et al., 2010): rarely used facets receive larger bonuses, and the bonus decays naturally as they are chosen more frequently. We use UCB here as an 

optimism-based exploration prior rather than a classical stationary-bandit algorithm. The arms (facets) are non-stationary and conditioned on an evolving persona, so we do not claim standard UCB regret guarantees. Instead, Explore provides a simple, interpretable inductive bias against repeated collapse onto the same facet, comple-menting MMR (local diversity) and InfoGain (semantic novelty) by promoting longer-horizon facet coverage. • Information gain (InfoGain ) measures the content-level novelty of a candidate’s expected evidence relative to accu-mulated learnings. While Explore encourages facet-level diversity, InfoGain focuses on semantic-level novelty, pri-oritizing branches that are more likely to yield genuinely new information from the web. 

λexp and λinfo balance breadth and novelty against align-ment. Both Explore and InfoGain complement the diversify-aware exploration described in Section 2.3: while the latter ensures that the initial question set spans distinct facets, it does not guarantee that the resulting content will be diverse. Explore and InfoGain help mitigate this by pro-moting long-term diversity at the facet and content levels, respectively. While our process uses a minimal three-factor utility for clarity and stability, the framework is easily ex-tensible — additional criteria (e.g., risk, credibility) can be incorporated as needed. 

Execution cost. Cexec (n⋆k) estimates remaining work if we expand n⋆k. It is also normalized to [0 , 1] so it is commensu-rate with utilities. We approximate the cost by the tokens of a saturated subtree beneath n⋆k, as tokens provide a consis-tent, model-agnostic proxy, and correlate with both latency and spend. See Appendix D for computation details. 

2.5. Persona Modeling 

Beyond deciding when to ask (Section 2.4), the system must also know who it is optimizing for. In deep research, users often do not know exactly what they want at the start. Their goals shift as they encounter new information, and partial re-sults may reveal new priorities. Fixing a full persona upfront risks overfitting to stale assumptions or flooding the system with irrelevant detail. To address this, we maintain a live 

persona that evolves dynamically as the research progresses. At each n⋆, STE ER maintains an updated persona estimate 

ˆP (n⋆) =  ˆptext (n⋆), ˆA(n⋆), where ˆptext (n⋆) captures the user’s profile and ˆA(n⋆) represents the current inferred set of aspects the user cares about. When a pause occurs, we update ˆP (n⋆) based on user-selected directions and any new suggestions, and implicitly incorporate recent research findings. This evolving persona conditions all downstream modules: it guides research and follow-up question genera-tion, shapes the branch utility score via alignment to ˆA(n⋆)

(decision), and steers final report synthesis. See Appendix K for full details on how the persona is inferred and updated using LLM prompts ( Persona Checklist Inference and Per-sona Modeling prompts), and how the evolving ˆP (n⋆) is used across the planning, research, and synthesis pipeline. A live persona keeps the interaction tightly aligned with the user’s current interests. It prevents drift caused by outdated assumptions, reduces unnecessary questions by filtering ir-relevant directions, and adapts to new priorities that emerge during exploration. 

## 3. Experiments 

3.1. Experimental Setup Evaluation data We synthesize query–persona pairs by adapting established datasets and methods, with light modi-fications to better suit our goals. We begin with 1k queries from the Researchy Questions dataset (Rosset et al., 2024), as used in DeepResearchGym (Coelho et al., 2025). For each query, we generate a plausible user persona ptext by adapting the ALOE profile–personality paradigm (Wu et al., 2025): we seed from ALOE profiles and prompt an LLM to propose new profiles that would reasonably ask the given query. To ensure diversity, we apply SBERT-based filtering (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) and keep only distinct, plausi-ble personas, following prior work (Wu et al., 2025; Wang 5An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

et al., 2023). Given each ptext , we generate 5–8 evaluation aspects A

using prompts inspired by Salemi & Zamani (2025), fol-lowing their checklist format to ensure that the aspects are actionable, measurable, and grounded in the persona. This enables robust alignment and focus evaluation, avoiding the ambiguity of more generic rubrics. Compared to Wu et al. (2025) and Salemi & Zamani (2025), our adaptations are minimal but tailored to deep research: (i) 

persona generation is query-conditioned to ensure relevance, 

(ii) diversity filtering is stricter to avoid near-duplicates, and 

(iii) aspects are framed for long-form, cited outputs. We evaluate on a held-out set of 200 queries. Full details of data generation are in Appendix E. 

User Agent simulation To enable scalable, repeatable evaluation, we simulate user interactions with a User Agent 

conditioned on the full persona P = ( ptext , A). The agent selects directions that best align with A and proposes a new follow-up when uncovered aspects remain, yielding realistic steering signals without human-in-the-loop variability. (See Appendix N for the full prompt.) 

Metrics We evaluate persona-tailored quality using two proposed metrics: Alignment and Focus , both judged by 

gpt-4.1-mini following DeepResearchGym . (Prompts used to obtain these metrics are listed in Appendix M.) We present the meta-evaluation results for the LLM judge in Appendix I. • Alignment: Given aspect set A and re-port R, we compute: Align( R, A) =

> 12|A|

P 

> a∈A

align( R, a ), align( R, a ) ∈ {0, 1, 2}.

Here, 0 means that the aspect is not addressed, 1means that it is partially addressed (e.g., mentioned or vaguely covered), and 2 means that it is fully addressed with sufficient detail and evidence, all scored by the LLM-judge. This gives an interpretable, per-aspect measure of user alignment. • Focus: We extract a set of keypoints KP — short, evidence-bearing spans — from R using an LLM, and then ask the judge whether each keypoint ( k ∈ KP )maps to at least one user aspect: Focus kp (R, A) =

> 1
> |KP|

P 

> k∈KP

I[map( k)̸ = ∅]. While alignment is akin to recall over aspects, focus acts as a form of precision ,rewarding dense, on-target content. In addition, we report DeepResearchGym ’s quality metrics, including clarity, depth, breadth, and insight, to evaluate general writing quality beyond persona targeting. 

Baselines We compare STE ER to two strong open-source frameworks: GPT-Researcher (Elovic, 2025) and Open Deep Research (LangChain, 2025), both evaluated as top-performing frameworks (Coelho et al., 2025). On the proprietary model side, we benchmark against OpenAI’s 

o4-mini-deep-research model. We compare systems under a controlled setting: for STE ER 

and the open-source frameworks, all agents use GPT-4o, the research tree is fixed (depth 3, breadth 3), outputs share the same token cap, and the only variable is persona information. For fairness, all baselines are run under three input settings: (1) query only, (2) query + initial persona (first sentence of 

ptext ), and (3) query + full persona. This allows us to assess how well each baseline adapts to different levels of user information. Note that STE ER always operates with only the initial persona, and must infer preferences dynamically throughout the interaction. 

3.2. How Much Does S TE ER Improve Persona-Tailored Quality? 

From Table 2, we see that STE ER achieves the strongest persona-tailored performance on both metrics across all sys-tems (e.g. 7.83% higher alignment than the runner-up GPT-Researcher full-persona ), even though some of those baselines are given the full persona, while STE ER only receives the first sentence. This highlights the effectiveness of STE ER ’s interactive pausing and live persona modeling, which en-able accurate mid-process adaptation without relying on full upfront persona input. This has practical appeal: real-world deployments often face privacy constraints, onboarding fric-tion, or noisy user profiles. STE ER ’s ability to achieve strong alignment under minimal initial input makes it more robust in such settings. 

STE ER also leads in breadth and balance, reflecting the role of STE ER ’s diversity-aware exploration and utility compo-nents, Explore and InfoGain , in promoting semantic nov-elty and facet diversity. STE ER also significantly outper-forms the open-source baselines in depth and insight, though it falls slightly short of the proprietary OpenAI model on these metrics. 

3.3. How Does S TE ER Provide Interpretable Controls for Optimal Pausing? 

As introduced in Section 2.4, STE ER offers two inter-pretable knobs to control pausing behavior: the base pause cost C0, which sets the system’s aversion to interruptions, and the tolerance budget Tol , which controls how quickly pause cost grows within a top-level direction. In this study, we vary C0 while keeping Tol = 3 fixed. This is because, in shallow trees (depth 3), the effect of Tol is limited. Tol 

is more impactful in long-horizon tasks where user fatigue may accumulate across levels. Conceptually, Tol captures a user-specific interaction limit. We tune C0 to match the pause budget ( Tol ) while maximizing gain per pause. 6An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Metric → Persona-Tailored Quality 

System ↓ Align Focus kp Clarity Depth Breadth Insight Balance GPT-Researcher 66.63 78.42 81.80 86.30 88.40 76.60 81.25 GPT-Researcher initial-persona 74.59 81.68 79.05 87.37 88.71 75.52 81.71 GPT-Researcher full-persona 79.48 83.83 77.93 87.09 90.31 79.05 82.58 OpenDeepResearch 62.74 83.72 74.90 82.40 88.85 68.39 81.25 OpenDeepResearch initial-persona 69.79 85.45 72.51 81.64 84.12 68.98 77.44 OpenDeepResearch full-persona 77.20 86.10 74.02 83.42 87.62 73.18 79.44 o4-mini-deep-research initial-persona 72.73 86.09 75.76 89.10 89.51 86.74 82.76 o4-mini-deep-research full-persona 75.72 86.02 75.54 87.19 87.36 85.01 82.63 

STE ER 85.70 86.45 79.97 88.67 91.29 83.04 84.19 

Table 2. Performance comparison between STE ER and baselines. For STE ER , we report performance at C0 = 0 .7 (see Section 3.3 for selection rationale). 

Figure 2. Distribution of number of pauses per run across base pause cost values. 

Figure 3. Alignment per pause across base pause cost values. 

To benchmark against intuitive alternatives, we introduce a 

PauseAgent baseline that uses an LLM agent to predict pause vs. proceed at each frontier node (prompt in Ap-pendix N). As shown in Figure 2 (and Appendix F.2), Pause-Agent pauses excessively, far exceeding the Tol = 3 budget. In contrast, STE ER with C0 ≥ 0.4 remains within budget, averaging fewer than 3 pauses. Frequent pausing also hurts efficiency. Figure 3 shows that alignment per pause drops sharply at low C0, while higher 

C0 yields fewer but more impactful interventions. This trade-off is evident in Figure 4: while absolute alignment declines as C0 increases, alignment and focus reach local 

Figure 4. Effect of base pause cost on alignment ( left ) and focus (right ). Baseline scores are shown as horizontal reference lines for comparison. 

maxima around C0 = 0 .7, indicating a practical sweet spot. In summary, STE ER supports calibrated control of interac-tion. C0 adjusts interruption cost directly, and Tol governs how that cost compounds over time. This formulation pro-vides both interpretability and personalization, outperform-ing the PauseAgent baseline in effectiveness and flexibility. 

3.4. How Does S TE ER Avoid Under-Exploration Driven by Personalization? 

A potential failure mode is overfitting to personalization: when optimization focuses solely on aspect alignment, the system quickly collapses to a narrow trajectory, branch util-ities flatten as ∆Align approaches zero, and exploration stalls. To prevent this, STE ER integrates three complemen-tary signals at different axes. First, diversity-aware exploration ensures that research di-rections span distinct facets at each step, avoiding early myopia. As shown in Table 3, removing it causes the largest drops in depth, breadth, and focus, along with a significant Method ↓ Alignment Focus kp Depth Breadth                   

> STE ER 85.82 87.79 90.27 93.15
> (w/o) Explore 84.98 ↓0.98% 85.17 ↓2.98% 89.86 ↓0.45% 92.60 ↓0.59%
> (w/o) InfoGain 82.81 ↓3.51% 86.40 ↓1.58% 90.41 ↑0.15% 92.73 ↓0.45%
> (w/o) Div Explore 84.57 ↓1.46% 84.29 ↓3.99% 88.63 ↓1.82% 91.09 ↓2.21%

Table 3. Ablation study on novelty and exploration components. Darker red indicates a larger performance drop relative to STE ER .

7An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

decline in alignment, underscoring its role in maintaining structural and semantic diversity throughout the session. In addition, two utility terms guide exploration: Explore 

encourages rotation across underrepresented facets, while 

InfoGain prioritizes semantic novelty. Ablating Explore 

leads to a large focus drop and notable declination in depth and breadth, with only a small impact on alignment, showing its importance in sustaining report-wide diversity. In con-trast, removing InfoGain yields the largest alignment drop but only relatively modest effects on other metrics. This suggests that without semantic novelty, the system tends to dig deeper into already-favored lines, satisfying more user aspects while producing redundant evidence. These complementary behaviors introduce an interpretable trade-off: λinfo prioritizes aspect satisfaction, while λexp favors breadth; we set both to 0.5 for balance. While our experiments focus on novelty and exploration, the utility function is extensible. Additional signals, such as factuality or plausibility, can be integrated into the same calibrated framework. Our contribution lies not in these specific factors, but in the interaction paradigm that supports modular, interpretable control over research behavior. 

3.5. User Study Evaluation 

To complement the automated LLM-judged metrics, we conducted a user study to evaluate whether STE ER is preferred by human users. We compared STE ER with GPT-Researcher and o4-mini-deep-research on 20 query–persona pairs. 12 annotators (all NLP/CS graduate students) viewed two reports for the same pair (one from 

STE ER , one from a baseline) in randomized order on our custom annotation platform. Annotators saw only the two final reports, side by side in randomized order — no clarifi-cation questions, interaction traces, or intermediate system behaviors were exposed — and were unfamiliar with our system or the baselines’ output formats. We did not observe consistent structural cues that would make a system iden-tifiable (e.g., tables of contents appeared across systems). We nonetheless acknowledge that perfect blinding is diffi-cult in any open-ended generation setting; see Appendix G and Limitations (Appendix J) for further discussion. For                   

> Metric Raw Agreement (%) Gwet’s AC1
> Alignment 82.0 0.639
> Focus 73.8 0.475
> Coverage
> SteER 65.9 0.318 Baselines 65.2 0.303
> Findability
> SteER 75.4 0.508 Baselines 65.6 0.311
> Table 4. Inter-annotator agreement for user study annotations.
> Figure 5. Pairwise human preference win rates on Alignment and
> Focus .

each comparison, annotators judged Alignment (better cov-erage of persona aspects), Focus (more on-topic with less redundancy), Coverage (aspect-level 0–2, averaged), and 

Findability (report-level 0–2 for ease of locating relevant information). This design captures both quality and usability: Alignment 

and Focus reflect perceived persona-fit 1; Coverage measures how thoroughly user interests are addressed, and Findability 

assesses how easily users can locate what matters. Full plat-form design and annotator instructions are in Appendix G. We collected 58 valid pairwise annotations. To validate the quality of the annotations, we computed agreement using pairwise metrics across all annotator pairs for each eval-uation dimension. Specifically, we report raw pairwise agreement and Gwet’s AC1 (Gwet, 2008), a prevalence-resistant chance-corrected agreement coefficient that avoids the artificial deflation often observed with Fleiss’ κ (Fleiss, 1971) when the label distribution is skewed. As summarized in Table 4, for Alignment and Focus pairwise preferences, annotators achieve raw pairwise agreement of 82 .0% and 

73 .8% , with AC1 values of 0.639 and 0.475 , respectively, indicating substantial and moderate agreement. For Cov-erage and Findability , we observe similar patterns of fair to moderate agreement. For Coverage , raw agreement is 

65 .9% for STE ER and 65 .2% when aggregating baselines (GPT-Researcher and o4-mini-deep-research ). For 

Findability , raw agreement is 75 .4% for STE ER and 65 .6% 

for the aggregated baselines. These values reflect consistent, non-trivial consensus across annotators on all dimensions, especially given the inherent subjectivity of report quality. As shown in Figure 5, STE ER is preferred in about 86 –90% 

of cases for Alignment and about 83% for Focus across GPT-Researcher and o4-mini-deep-research .Figure 6 shows significant gains in Coverage and Findabil-ity for STE ER . On a 0–2 aspect-coverage scale, STE ER 

improves the average by +0 .623 (from 0.828 to 1.451 ,

p = 3 .05 e − 12 ), a relative improvement of about 75% 

which indicates a shift from below “somewhat covered” to-ward between “somewhat” and “fully” covered. On the 0–2

Findability scale, STE ER improves by +0 .690 (from 0.845 

to 1.534 , p = 1 .64 e − 11 ), moving readers from mostly     

> 1Note that the Alignment and Focus metrics used in the user study are based on pairwise human preferences and are not directly comparable to the automatic metrics defined in Section 3.1.

8An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research                

> Figure 6. Human ratings on Coverage and Findability .Left: Aver-age aspect-level Coverage scores of STE ER and baselines. Right:
> Average Findability scores of STE ER and baselines.

difficult-to-medium retrieval to comfortably above medium and closer to “easy to find.” Together, these results indicate that STE ER produces reports that are both better aligned with persona needs and easier to navigate. 

## 4. Discussion 

User Agent simulation To understand how our pause pol-icy translates into user-facing behavior, we analyzed the 

User Agent used in offline evaluation (Appendix F.4). The 

User Agent maintains very high precision across base-pause costs ( > 0.97 ), while recall declines as C0 increases, and re-port alignment closely tracks User Agent recall ( r ≈ 0.81 ). This indicates that pausing affects outcomes primarily by changing how many promising directions are retained and developed, offering a controllable alignment–effort frontier via C0. We view the User Agent as a diagnostic tool for sweeping policies and stress-testing settings, but acknowl-edge that real users may be noisier and value exploration differently; future work will calibrate the User Agent with human logs and run counterfactual replays to quantify gaps between simulated and actual behavior. 

Persona modeling We also examine how well STE ER ’s live persona tracks report quality. A useful takeaway from Appendix F.3 is that STE ER not only pauses effectively but also recovers and maintains an accurate persona during a run. Even with only the first persona sentence as input, the inferred persona’s alignment with the ground-truth aspect set strongly tracks final report alignment ( r ≈ 0.85 , p < 

10 −3), indicating that the learned persona is informative rather than decorative. As C0 increases, pauses become fewer, the inferred persona is less specified, and downstream alignment declines. In practice, persona–report agreement is a useful diagnostic for selecting C0: choosing the smallest 

C0 that achieves a target agreement while balancing the alignment–effort trade-off. 

Broader application Beyond our experiments, STE ER 

suggests a general pattern for long-horizon, high-stakes tasks that must balance personalization with exploration un-der interpretable control. For instance, scientific-discovery agents and research stacks could benefit from pausing and live-persona steering to curb drift while preserving explo-ration (Team et al., 2025; Schmidgall & Moor, 2025; Zheng et al., 2025a). Likewise, high-stakes domains such as fi-nancial advising and trading (Zhang et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024) and law and policy research (Li et al., 2024; Pipitone & Alami, 2024) are natural application areas for STE ER ’s interpretable, user-steerable control. Because of STE ER ’s modularity, domains can add factors such as factuality, cita-tion quality, or safety alongside novelty and exploration. We view validating these extensions as promising future work. 

## 5. Conclusion and Future Work 

We have presented STE ER , proposing a new interactive paradigm for deep research. STE ER couples a cost–benefit pause policy with interpretable controls, a live persona that adapts mid-process, and diversity–novelty utility sig-nals that keep exploration purposeful. Our experiments show that STE ER improves persona-tailored quality by 

7.83% –22 .80% over strong open-source and proprietary systems, leads on generic quality metrics, and is preferred by human readers in over 85% of alignment and 83% of focus pairwise judgments. We also release a persona–query evaluation suite and data pipeline to support reproducible testing and future model development. Looking ahead, several directions appear especially promis-ing. On the system side, exploring speculative pre-execution to reduce latency, a dynamic breadth–depth planner, and policy learning for pause and branch selection could further strengthen real-time usability. On the evaluation side, end-to-end user studies evaluating full interactions, including task success, time to insight, perceived control and trust, and cognitive load, would better capture real-world value. We also see studying STE ER ’s robustness to noisier real-user behavior — contradictory feedback, partial or incom-plete responses, and outright abandonment of the clarifica-tion process — as an important next step, naturally tied to preference-conflict handling in the live persona model (see Appendix J). 

## Impact Statement 

This work presents STE ER , a framework for interactive, human-guided deep research agents. Our primary contri-bution is moving away from monolithic autonomous work-flows toward a paradigm where model reasoning is transpar-ent and steerable by the user. This research has the potential to significantly enhance pro-ductivity in knowledge-intensive sectors by reducing the cognitive load of information synthesis. By enabling agents to adapt to user intent in real-time, we democratize access to 9An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

complex research capabilities, allowing non-experts to navi-gate dense technical or domain-specific literature effectively. Furthermore, our proposed adaptive pause mechanism im-proves computational efficiency by preventing agents from wasting resources on misaligned or irrelevant search trajec-tories. We acknowledge two primary risks associated with highly personalized research agents: • Automation Bias and Over-Reliance: As agents be-come more capable of long-horizon reasoning, users may uncritically accept generated summaries. STE ER 

mitigates this by design; the interactive nature of the framework forces periodic user engagement, keeping the human in the loop and encouraging critical evalu-ation of the agent’s intermediate findings rather than passive consumption of a final output. • Echo Chambers and Confirmation Bias: Our sys-tem’s live persona modeling optimizes for user align-ment, which carries the risk of reinforcing existing biases by prioritizing information that aligns with the user’s preconceptions. To address this, future deploy-ment of such systems should include diversity-aware exploration in the frontier selection algorithm (as de-scribed in Section 2.3 to ensure opposing viewpoints are surfaced, even when they conflict with the modeled persona. Ultimately, this work aims to align powerful autonomous agents with human values. By prioritizing steerability over pure autonomy, we provide a blueprint for safer AI systems that remain responsive to human oversight during complex tasks. 

## References 

Alzubi, S., Brooks, C., Chiniya, P., Contente, E., von Gerlach, C., Irwin, L., Jiang, Y., Kaz, A., Nguyen, W., Oh, S., et al. Open deep search: Democratizing search with open-source reasoning agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20201 , 2025. Andukuri, C., Fr ¨anken, J.-P., Gerstenberg, T., and Goodman, N. Star-gate: Teaching language models to ask clarifying questions. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Auer, P. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of machine learning re-search , 3(Nov):397–422, 2002. Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Fischer, P. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine learning , 47(2):235–256, 2002. Cai, Z., Chang, B., and Han, W. Human-in-the-loop through chain-of-thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07932 ,2023. Carbonell, J. and Goldstein, J. The use of mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering documents and producing summaries. In Proceedings of the 21st annual interna-tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-ment in information retrieval , pp. 335–336, 1998. Chen, M., Sun, R., Pfister, T., and Arik, S. ¨O. Learning to clarify: Multi-turn conversations with action-based contrastive self-training. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 . OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= SIE6VFps9x .Coelho, J., Ning, J., He, J., Mao, K., Paladugu, A., Setlur, P., Jin, J., Callan, J., Magalh ˜aes, J., Martins, B., et al. Deepresearchgym: A free, transparent, and reproducible evaluation sandbox for deep research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19253 , 2025. Du, M., Xu, B., Zhu, C., Wang, X., and Mao, Z. Deep-research bench: A comprehensive benchmark for deep research agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11763 , 2025. Elovic, A. Gpt researcher: Llm-based autonomous agent for deep research. 2025. URL https://github.com/ assafelovic/gpt-researcher .Fleiss, J. L. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological bulletin , 76(5):378, 1971. Frisch, I. and Giulianelli, M. LLM agents in interaction: Measuring personality consistency and linguistic align-ment in interacting populations of large language models. In Deshpande, A., Hwang, E., Murahari, V., Park, J. S., Yang, D., Sabharwal, A., Narasimhan, K., and Kalyan, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Personal-ization of Generative AI Systems (PERSONALIZE 2024) ,pp. 102–111, St. Julians, Malta, March 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024. personalize-1.9. URL https://aclanthology. org/2024.personalize-1.9/ .Google. Try deep research and our new experimental model in gemini, your ai assistant. 2024. URL https: //blog.google/products/gemini/google-gemini-deep-research/ .Gwet, K. L. Computing inter-rater reliability and its vari-ance in the presence of high agreement. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , 61(1):29–48, 2008. 10 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Huang, L., Liu, Y., Jiang, J., Zhang, R., Yan, J., Li, J., and Zhao, W. X. Manusearch: Democratizing deep search in large language models with a transparent and open multi-agent framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18105 ,2025. Jamieson, K., Malloy, M., Nowak, R., and Bubeck, S. lil’ ucb : An optimal exploration algorithm for multi-armed bandits. In Balcan, M. F., Feldman, V., and Szepesv ´ari, C. (eds.), Proceedings of The 27th Conference on Learning Theory , volume 35 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 423–439, Barcelona, Spain, 13–15 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v35/jamieson14.html .Jin, B., Zeng, H., Yue, Z., Yoon, J., Arik, S., Wang, D., Zamani, H., and Han, J. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 , 2025. LangChain. Open deep research. 2025. URL https: //github.com/langchain- ai/open_deep_ research?tab=readme-ov-file .Li, H., Chen, J., Yang, J., Ai, Q., Jia, W., Liu, Y., Lin, K., Wu, Y., Yuan, G., Hu, Y., et al. Legalagentbench: Evaluating llm agents in legal domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.17259 , 2024. Li, L., Chu, W., Langford, J., and Schapire, R. E. Acontextual-bandit approach to personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th interna-tional conference on World wide web , pp. 661–670, 2010. Li, X., Dong, G., Jin, J., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhu, Y., Zhang, P., and Dou, Z. Search-o1: Agentic search-enhanced large reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05366 ,2025a. Li, Z., Shareghi, E., and Collier, N. ReasonGraph: Visualiza-tion of reasoning methods and extended inference paths. In Mishra, P., Muresan, S., and Yu, T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations) ,pp. 140–147, Vienna, Austria, July 2025b. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-253-4. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-demo.14. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2025.acl-demo.14/ .Li, Z., Shareghi, E., and Collier, N. Reasongraph: Visualisa-tion of reasoning paths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03979 ,2025c. OpenAI. Deep research system card. Technical Report, OpenAI , 2025. URL https://cdn.openai.com/ deep-research-system-card.pdf .Pang, R. Y., Feng, K., Feng, S., Li, C., Shi, W., Tsvetkov, Y., Heer, J., and Reinecke, K. Interactive reasoning: Visualizing and controlling chain-of-thought reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23678 ,2025. Pipitone, N. and Alami, G. H. Legalbench-rag: A bench-mark for retrieval-augmented generation in the legal do-main. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10343 , 2024. Prabhakar, A., Ram, R., Chen, Z., Savarese, S., Wang, F., Xiong, C., Wang, H., and Yao, W. Enterprise deep re-search: Steerable multi-agent deep research for enterprise analytics, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2510.17797 .Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Inui, K., Jiang, J., Ng, V., and Wan, X. (eds.), Proceed-ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pp. 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1410. URL https: //aclanthology.org/D19-1410/ .Ren, A. Z., Dixit, A., Bodrova, A., Singh, S., Tu, S., Brown, N., Xu, P., Takayama, L. T., Xia, F., Varley, J., et al. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment for large language model planners. In Conference on Robot Learn-ing (CoRL) . Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023. Rosset, C., Chung, H.-L., Qin, G., Chau, E. C., Feng, Z., Awadallah, A., Neville, J., and Rao, N. Researchy questions: A dataset of multi-perspective, decomposi-tional questions for llm web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17896 , 2024. Salemi, A. and Zamani, H. Lamp-qa: A benchmark for per-sonalized long-form question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00137 , 2025. Salemi, A., Mysore, S., Bendersky, M., and Zamani, H. LaMP: When large language models meet personal-ization. In Ku, L.-W., Martins, A., and Srikumar, V. (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7370–7392, Bangkok, Thailand, Au-gust 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.399. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.399/ .Schmidgall, S. and Moor, M. Agentrxiv: Towards collaborative autonomous research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18102 , 2025. 11 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Song, H., Jiang, J., Min, Y., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Zhao, W. X., Fang, L., and Wen, J.-R. R1-searcher: Incentivizing the search capability in llms via reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05592 , 2025. Team, N., Zhang, B., Feng, S., Yan, X., Yuan, J., Yu, Z., He, X., Huang, S., Hou, S., Nie, Z., et al. Novelseek: When agent becomes the scientist–building closed-loop system from hypothesis to verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16938 , 2025. Wang, Y., Kordi, Y., Mishra, S., Liu, A., Smith, N. A., Khashabi, D., and Hajishirzi, H. Self-instruct: Align-ing language models with self-generated instructions. In Rogers, A., Boyd-Graber, J., and Okazaki, N. (eds.), Pro-ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pp. 13484–13508, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/ 2023.acl-long.754. URL https://aclanthology. org/2023.acl-long.754/ .Wang, Z., Bi, B., Luo, Y., Asur, S., and Cheng, C. N. Di-versity enhances an llm’s performance in rag and long-context task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09017 , 2025. Wu, C.-K., Tam, Z. R., Wu, C.-C., Lin, C.-Y., Lee, H.-y., and Chen, Y.-N. I need help! evaluating LLM’s ability to ask for users’ support: A case study on text-to-SQL gen-eration. In Al-Onaizan, Y., Bansal, M., and Chen, Y.-N. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 2191– 2199, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024. emnlp-main.131. URL https://aclanthology. org/2024.emnlp-main.131/ .Wu, S., Fung, Y. R., Qian, C., Kim, J., Hakkani-Tur, D., and Ji, H. Aligning LLMs with individual preferences via interaction. In Rambow, O., Wanner, L., Apidianaki, M., Al-Khalifa, H., Eugenio, B. D., and Schockaert, S. (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Com-putational Linguistics , pp. 7648–7662, Abu Dhabi, UAE, January 2025. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. coling-main.511/ .xAI. Grok 3. 2025. URL https://x.ai/news/grok-3.Xie, Z., Wu, J., Shen, Y., Xia, Y., Li, X., Chang, A., Rossi, R., Kumar, S., Majumder, B. P., Shang, J., et al. A survey on personalized and pluralistic preference alignment in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07070 ,2025. Yu, Y., Yao, Z., Li, H., Deng, Z., Jiang, Y., Cao, Y., Chen, Z., Suchow, J., Cui, Z., Liu, R., et al. Fincon: A syn-thesized llm multi-agent system with conceptual verbal reinforcement for enhanced financial decision making. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 137010–137045, 2024. Zhang, D., Zhao, Y., Wu, J., Li, B., Yin, W., Zhang, L., Jiang, Y., Li, Y., Tu, K., Xie, P., et al. Evolvesearch: An iterative self-evolving search agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22501 , 2025a. Zhang, M., Knox, W. B., and Choi, E. Modeling future conversation turns to teach llms to ask clarifying questions. In Yue, Y., Garg, A., Peng, N., Sha, F., and Yu, R. (eds.), International Conference on Representation Learning , volume 2025, pp. 60722– 60742, 2025b. URL https : / / proceedings . iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/file/ 97e2df4bb8b2f1913657344a693166a2 -Paper-Conference.pdf .Zhang, W., Zhao, L., Xia, H., Sun, S., Sun, J., Qin, M., Li, X., Zhao, Y., Zhao, Y., Cai, X., et al. A multimodal foundation agent for financial trading: Tool-augmented, diversified, and generalist. In Proceedings of the 30th acm sigkdd conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pp. 4314–4325, 2024. Zhang, W., Zhang, X., Zhang, C., Yang, L., Shang, J., Wei, Z., Zou, H. P., Huang, Z., Wang, Z., Gao, Y., et al. Person-aagent: When large language model agents meet person-alization at test time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06254 ,2025c. Zheng, T., Deng, Z., Tsang, H. T., Wang, W., Bai, J., Wang, Z., and Song, Y. From automation to autonomy: A survey on large language models in scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13259 , 2025a. Zheng, Y., Fu, D., Hu, X., Cai, X., Ye, L., Lu, P., and Liu, P. Deepresearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforce-ment learning in real-world environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03160 , 2025b. 

## A. Related Work 

Deep research LLM-based research agents combine re-trieval and multi-step reasoning to produce long-form an-swers (Coelho et al., 2025). Among the open-source frame-works, two dominant paradigms are multi-agent pipelines that split planning, browsing, and reading across roles (Huang et al., 2025; Alzubi et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025a; Zhang et al., 2025a) and RL-trained agents that learn to search and reason (Zheng et al., 2025b; Jin et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025). On the evaluation side, benchmarks 12 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

such as DeepResearchGym (Coelho et al., 2025) and Deep-Research Bench (Du et al., 2025) have begun to standard-ize this setting, providing realistic research-style questions and automated evaluation protocols for long-form, citation-heavy reports. Despite progress, most systems still follow one-shot scoping with at most a single clarification, then a long autonomous run and a monolithic report, offering little mid-process control when user needs evolve. Concur-rent work, EDR (Prabhakar et al., 2025), adds user-initiated mid-process steering via an exposed task plan, but lacks an adaptive pause policy and live persona modeling. 

Personalization and alignment A growing line of work pursues personalization for LLM agents, moving from static profile–personality conditioning and long-form checklists (Wu et al., 2025; Salemi et al., 2024; Salemi & Zamani, 2025) toward interactive, test-time adaptation and multi-stakeholder alignment (Xie et al., 2025). Recent trends probe persona behavior in interaction (e.g., consistency and drift under dialogue) (Frisch & Giulianelli, 2024) and build agent mechanisms that adapt actions to user preferences at inference time (Zhang et al., 2025c). While this work estab-lishes that preferences should be updated during use, most approaches still lack interpretable, end-to-end controls for deciding when to seek input and how to steer long-horizon generation as goals evolve. 

Interactive reasoning and control Another closely re-lated line of work equips LLMs with interactive reasoning via clarification. Prior studies train models to ask when information is missing (Andukuri et al.; Ren et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024), model future turns to decide ask vs. answer (Zhang et al., 2025b), and learn clarification policies with contrastive objectives (Chen et al., 2025). Visualization tools improve transparency and user steering over chains of thought (Pang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025c). However, these efforts mostly address local interactions or static control, rather than providing interpretable, end-to-end controls for 

when to pause, what to explore, and how to adapt personal-ization mid-process in long-horizon research. Table 1 positions STE ER against both deep research frame-works and interactive/persona-aware reasoning systems, clarifying which capabilities each class actually offers. Open-source deep research frameworks and proprietary web-based services are all built around long autonomous run paradigm: once the user issues a query, a fixed pipeline exe-cutes to completion with no exposed, interpretable control over where in the research tree to intervene or when to ask for guidance. The ◆marks in the mid-process steering col-umn indicate the limited behavior: these systems sometimes allow a single upfront scoping or plan-confirmation step before the full autonomous run, but provide no further steer-ing within the trajectory; beyond that point they are fully autonomous. In addition, for proprietary systems, public documentation suggests that fixed personas or user memory may be used, but there is no evidence of live persona mod-eling, and their control policies and internal mechanisms are not accessible or benchmarkable; we therefore restrict ourselves to conceptual comparison. Meanwhile, interactive/persona-aware frameworks occupy the complementary side of the space: PersonaAgent (Zhang et al., 2025c) maintains a live user representation and adapts over time but has no steering capability, while ReasonGraph (Li et al., 2025b) and HITL CoT MCS (Cai et al., 2023) expose mid-process reasoning for visualization, inspection, or human correction but implement no adaptive pause mech-anism and do not perform live persona modeling. Taken together, the table shows that existing systems provide at most one of the three capabilities we target — mid-process steering, adaptive pause decisions, or live persona model-ing — and never all three in a benchmarkable deep research setting. STE ER is the only system that supports all three simultaneously, coupling a cost–benefit pause policy with a live persona that conditions planning, branch utility, and synthesis within a single research tree. 

## B. Use of LLMs for Writing Assistance 

We used ChatGPT-4o only for language-level editing. Con-cretely: • Polishing prose, tightening sentences, fixing grammar and LaTeX wording, reordering or shortening paragraphs, and suggesting alternative titles or section headers. • No ideas, methods, claims, proofs, experiments, numbers, figures, tables, code, prompts, or citations were produced by the model. All technical content, analyses, and results were authored and verified by the authors. • We supplied already written passages or outlines and re-quested editing (for example, “polish wording, keep all technical details unchanged”). • The model was not given proprietary data, code, or un-published results beyond the text to be edited. All outputs were reviewed by the authors for accuracy and tone. 

## C. Diversified Subset Selection 

For completeness, we include the pseudocode of the greedy MMR selection used in our framework. Given a candidate set of follow-up questions C = {q1, . . . , q M } with confi-dence scores conf( qi) and embeddings ei, the algorithm selects a diversified subset C′ of size K:13 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Require: Candidate list C = {q1, . . . , q M } with confi-dences conf( qi), embeddings ei; desired subset size 

K

Ensure: Diversified subset C′

1: C ← sort C in non-increasing order of conf( qi)

2: C′ ← ∅ , I C′ ← ∅ 

3: while |C ′| < K do 

4: C ← { i | i / ∈ IC′ }

5: if IC′ = ∅ then 

6: i⋆ ← min C {top-confidence question }

7: else 

8: for i ∈ C do 

9: di ← max 

> j∈IC′

sim( ei, ej ) + ε

10: end for 

11: i⋆ ← arg min i∈C di {least similar to current set (MMR criterion) }

12: end if 

13: C′ ← C ′ ∪ { qi⋆ }, IC′ ← IC′ ∪ { i⋆}

14: end while 

15: return C′

## D. Details for Gain of Pausing Implementation 

Alignment gain Let r(n) denote the chunk report at node 

n, formed by concatenating the learnings {ℓi}mi=1 (if there are m learnings at the node), and let ˆAn be the inferred aspect set at that node. For the k-th child node of a frontier node n⋆k,

∆Align( n⋆k) = Align  r(n⋆k), ˆAn⋆



− Align  r(n⋆), ˆAn⋆

.

Exploration bonus For each chunk report, we prompt an LLM to assign short tags (see Appendix K, Search Result Processing prompt). We maintain the global tag set T and a cumulative usage count count( T ) for each tag T up to the current step. With a small constant ϵ > 0, the exploration bonus is 

Explore( n⋆k) = 1

|T | 

X 

> T∈T

ϵ

1 + pcount( T ) .

This UCB-style term grants larger bonus to under-tried tags and decays as a tag is reused. 

Information gain To reward novelty relative to what has already been learned, we compare a candidate’s node em-bedding to the centroid of accumulated learnings. Let 

eℓ be the embedding of a learning ℓ. For node n with number of learnings L(n) = {ℓi}m(n) 

> i=1

, define its embed-ding en = 1

> m(n)

Pm(n) 

> i=1

eℓi (when m(n) > 0). Let L

be the set of all learnings gathered so far, M = |L| , and Data Split → All Eval Total Queries 1000 200 Total Query-Persona Pairs 1381 286 Queries with 1 Persona 646 (64.6%) 125 (62.5%) 

Queries with 2 Personas 327 (32.7%) 64 (32.0%) 

Queries with 3 Personas 27 (2.7%) 11 (5.5%) 

Table 5. Data Statistics 

μ = 1

> M

P 

> ℓ∈L

eℓ. Then 

InfoGain( n⋆k) = 



1 − sim  en⋆k , μ , m(n⋆k) > 0 and M > 0,

0, m(n⋆k) = 0 ,

1, otherwise. 

Execution cost Let D be the max depth, d(n) the depth of node n, and K the branching factor. For child n⋆k, the remaining depth is drem = D − d(n⋆k). The number of nodes in a saturated K-ary subtree is 

Nrem =



K drem +1 − 1

K − 1 , K > 1,drem + 1 , K = 1 .

With a running average token cost Tok avg per node, the esti-mated tokens are T est  

> k

= Tok avg Nrem , and the normalized execution cost is 

Cexec (n⋆k) = T est 

> k

T est  

> k

+ Tok avg 

= Nrem 

Nrem + 1 .

Filtering candidates when pausing Let Uk = U (n⋆k)

and conf k ∈ [0 , 1] be a confidence score generated by the LLM (see Appendix K, Search Result Processing prompt). Define the uncertainty radius 

rk = (1 − conf k) max  

> i∈K

Ui − min  

> i∈K

Ui

,U upper  

> k

= Uk + rk, U lower  

> k

= Uk − rk.

The could-be-the-best set is 

S = k U upper  

> k

≥ max  

> i∈K

U lower  

> i

.

This mirrors upper and lower confidence bounds for best-arm filtering (Jamieson et al., 2014). 

## E. Data Construction Details 

To evaluate our method, we need a dataset with deep research worthy questions paired with realistic personas, where personas are, as defined in Section 2.1, (ptext , A),14 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

where ptext is a string, combining the user’s profile and per-sonality, and A is a set of aspects that the user is interested to see in a high-quality, well-aligned final report. We con-struct our dataset on top of the subset of 1,000 queries from Researchy Questions dataset (Rosset et al., 2024) used in DeepResearchGym (Coelho et al., 2025). For each query, we first generate one or more (ptext that would be reasonable to ask the query. For this, we adopt a two-step approach. In the first step, inspired by Wu et al. (2025) and (Wang et al., 2023), we use an iterative self-generation and filtering pipeline. In each round, 3 profiles are randomly selected from the profiles in the ALOE dataset (Wu et al., 2025) and used as input to an off-the-shelf LLM (GPT-4o) to generate 3 new profiles that would be reason-able to ask the query per iteration. Then we introduce an automatic filtering process based on semantic similarity to ensure the distinctiveness and diversity of the generated pro-files. Same as Wu et al. (2025), we use Sentence Transform-ers (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) to compute embedding of the generated profiles and measure the cosine similarity among the generated new profiles. For each new profile, if the highest similarity score compared to the other profiles exceeds 0.65, the profile is considered too similar to at least one of the other profiles and discarded. Otherwise, it will be accepted as a successful new profile to pair with the query. We repeat the process until 3 new accepted profiles are gen-erated. In step 2, for each accepted profile, we generate a reasonable personality with GPT-4o to pair with it. For this, we randomly sample personalities from personality pool of the ALOE dataset as sample personalities fed into the LLM for generation. Once we have generated one or more ptext for each query, we then generate the set of aspects A for each ptext . We adopt the same approach as in Salemi & Zamani (2025) to generate 5-8 specific aspects that a user (described by ptext )would expect to see in a comprehensive and helpful report to the query, along with an evidence and a reasoning for each aspect, attributed from ptext .Table 5 details the statistics of our generated dataset. All prompts for persona/profile/aspect generation are provided in Appendix L. 

## F. Additional Experiment Details 

F.1. Additional Metrics 

Table 6 reports sentence-level focus and DeepResearchGym relevance (support ↑ and contradiction ↓). We do not use sentence-level focus as a primary metric because it is length sensitive: the score Focus st is the fraction of sentences mapped to any aspect, so longer reports with a few con-nective or background sentences are penalized, whereas terse styles can inflate the ratio. Still, STE ER achieves competitive values (e.g., 80 .67 at C0=0 .1), on par with the proprietary model and higher than the open-source base-lines, indicating that personalization does not come at the cost of sentence-level topicality. DeepResearchGym relevance compares a report to a pre-extracted, task-generic keypoint list; because STE ER steers into personalized directions, it is expected to score lower on relevance sup than a system optimized for the generic key-points (e.g., o4-mini-deep-research ), while main-taining moderate relevance con . In our results, STE ER ’s relevance sup is similar to GPT-Researcher and OpenDeepRe-search, with contradiction around 1.10 –1.13 ; the proprietary model attains higher support but also substantially higher contradiction, whereas OpenDeepResearch shows low con-tradiction but lower support. Taken together, these met-rics are complementary diagnostics: sentence-level focus confirms topicality at the sentence granularity, and DeepRe-searchGym relevance reflects overlap with generic keypoints rather than user-specific goals. 

F.2. Base Pause Cost vs. Pause Behavior 

To better understand system behavior, Figure 2 shows the distribution of number of pauses per run. As expected, lowering base pause cost increases the number of pauses, with median pauses dropping from around 10 ( C0 = 0 .0)to fewer than 2 ( C0 ≥ 0.8). Compared to an LLM-based PauseAgent baseline, which issues many more questions, 

STE ER ’s cost-sensitive mechanism achieves tighter con-trol over the frequency of interruptions. This suggests that base pause cost provides a direct and interpretable knob for regulating user burden. 

F.3. S TE ER’s Persona Modeling Analysis 

To assess the effectiveness of STE ER ’s dynamic persona modeling, we examine how well the inferred persona aligns with the system’s final report over the course of interac-tion. Specifically, we track the alignment score between the generated report and the inferred persona at different base pause cost ( C0) settings, alongside the alignment between the report and the ground-truth persona provided at the start. 

Report Alignment Tracks Persona Alignment As shown in the right panel of Figure 7, there is a strong posi-tive correlation between STE ER ’s report alignment and the alignment of its inferred persona to the ground-truth aspect set. The Pearson correlation is r = 0 .85 (p = 8 .7 × 10 −4), indicating that improvements in inferred persona accuracy are tightly coupled with improvements in report quality. This supports the intuition that STE ER ’s performance stems not only from architectural advances like mid-process paus-ing, but also from its ability to incrementally build an accu-rate model of user goals. 15 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research                                     

> System Focus st ↑Relevance sup ↑Relevance con ↓
> GPT-Researcher 67.07 61.39 1.02 GPT-Researcher initial-persona 69.18 60.82 1.11 GPT-Researcher full-persona 70.78 59.94 1.04 OpenDeepResearch 73.15 60.36 0.69
> OpenDeepResearch initial-persona 75.61 57.07 0.81 OpenDeepResearch full-persona 78.84 57.06 0.81 o4-mini-deep-research initial-persona 78.41 67.36 1.74 o4-mini-deep-research full-persona 80.60 66.45 1.94
> STE ER [C0=0 .7] 78.51 60.47 1.13
> STE ER [C0=0 .1] 80.67 60.19 1.10

Table 6. Performance comparison between STE ER and baseline frameworks on sentence-level focus score and report relevance scores. 

Figure 7. Analysis of User Agent and Persona Modeling Perfor-mance across Base Pause Cost ( C0). Left: User Agent precision, recall, and STE ER report alignment scores plotted across vary-ing base pause cost values. Right: Alignment scores of STE ER ’s inferred persona and final report, both evaluated against the ground-truth aspect set A, plotted across varying base pause cost values. 

Impact of Base Pause Cost We observe a general down-ward trend in both inferred persona alignment and report alignment as base pause cost increases. This confirms that higher interruption costs reduce the frequency of clarifying interactions, resulting in less accurate persona estimates and, consequently, less aligned outputs. In contrast, low C0

values allow STE ER to query the user more frequently, lead-ing to refined persona inference and stronger downstream alignment. These results highlight the central role of interactive re-finement in personalized research workflows. Rather than relying solely on upfront persona injection, STE ER learns about the user incrementally — and this process is empiri-cally shown to improve alignment. The correlation between inferred and actual persona alignment validates the design of our live persona model and its integration into the decision-making process. 

F.4. User Agent Performance Analysis 

To enable scalable, automatic evaluation of STE ER , we employ a User Agent that simulates a real user interacting with the system. This User Agent is responsible for selecting preferred research directions based on a target persona and proposing new follow-up questions when relevant aspects remain uncovered. Its effectiveness directly impacts the utility of our offline evaluation framework. As shown in the left panel of Figure 7, the User Agent maintains consistently high precision across a wide range of 

C0 values, with scores above 0.97. This suggests that when the agent chooses to retain a direction, it is highly likely to align with the user’s intended aspects. In contrast, recall is more sensitive to the pausing configuration. At lower 

C0 (e.g., 0.1), the User Agent achieves peak recall near 0.95, but recall steadily declines as C0 increases, falling to approximately 0.85 by C0 = 1.0. This reflects the agent’s conservative behavior under higher interruption costs, where it refrains from selecting additional directions that could be beneficial. We also observe that the alignment score of the final report generated by STE ER (in purple) closely tracks the recall curve of the User Agent. The Pearson correlation between the two is strong and statistically significant ( r = 0 .81 ,

p = 2 .49 × 10 −3), as annotated in the plot. This indicates that the breadth of information the agent retains during interaction is highly predictive of the alignment quality of the final report. The stronger the agent’s coverage of relevant aspects (recall), the more aligned the report tends to be with the user’s needs. These results confirm that the simulated User Agent is not only a faithful proxy for real user behavior but also a critical driver of STE ER ’s alignment performance. Its high pre-cision ensures quality, while its recall effectively governs how much of the user’s goals are ultimately realized in the research output. 

## G. User Study Details 

To complement automated evaluation, we conducted a hu-man annotation study to directly assess how well STE ER 

reports align with user personas compared to baseline sys-tems. We developed a custom web-based annotation plat-form (Figure 8) that guides annotators through a structured 16 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

evaluation procedure with clear instructions and embedded report viewers. 

G.1. Setup 

Annotators were provided with a persona card containing (i) the query, (ii) a short persona description, and (iii) the per-sona’s interested aspects —the specific information needs that the final report should cover. These interested aspects formed the primary basis of evaluation. Annotators then evaluated two reports for the same query—persona pair: one generated by STE ER and one by a baseline system (either GPT-Researcher or Open Deep Research). Report order was randomized to reduce bias. 

G.2. Evaluation Procedure 

• Step 1: Aspect Coverage. Annotators skimmed both reports and rated, for each aspect, how well the report addressed it on a 3-point scale: 0 = not covered , 1= somewhat covered , 2 = fully covered . When as-signing a score of 1 or 2, annotators were instructed to copy-paste a short supporting quote (1—2 sentences) from the report to ground their judgment. This ensured ratings were evidence-backed rather than impressionis-tic. • Step 2: Findability. Annotators rated how easy it was to locate content relevant to each aspect in the report on a 3-point scale: 0 = difficult , 1 = medium , 2 = easy .This step captured not only whether the aspect was present, but also whether it was readily discoverable by a reader. • Step 3: Report Comparison. Based on their cover-age and findability assessments, annotators selected a winner between the two reports along two dimensions: 

Alignment (which report better served the persona’s aspects) and Focus (which report stayed more on-topic versus digressing into irrelevant content). 

Interface Design. The interface (Figure 8) displayed both reports side by side in embedded PDF viewers, alongside the persona’s aspects in a draggable panel for quick reference. Each evaluation step was clearly separated into dedicated panels, with concise instructions and tips (e.g., “ You don’t need to read every word —scan section titles and opening sentences for relevant content”). Progress indicators guided annotators through the sequence, ensuring consistency. Im-portantly, the platform emphasized that judgments should be made from the persona’s perspective , not based on annotators’ personal preferences. 

Instructions and Quality Control. The study followed a three-step protocol: As displayed in Figure 9, annotators were instructed to: 1. Read the persona aspects carefully, treating them as the ground truth for evaluation. 2. Provide evidence quotes for all non-zero aspect cover-age ratings. 3. Complete all steps in sequence (coverage → findability 

→ comparison). 4. Judge strictly by persona relevance, not by report ver-bosity, formatting, or personal opinion. These safeguards helped ensure high-quality, reproducible annotations grounded in persona-aligned judgments. 

Blinding considerations. Pairwise comparison in open-ended generation cannot guarantee perfect blinding, and we treat this as a known limitation rather than a solved problem. We took several steps to reduce identifiability risk: (i) annotators were shown only the two final reports, side by side in randomized order, with no access to clarification questions, user-system interaction traces, persona updates, or any other intermediate system behavior; (ii) all systems produced report-style outputs with broadly similar structure — e.g., tables of contents and section headings appeared across both STE ER and the baselines — so we did not observe consistent structural giveaways; and (iii) annotators were unfamiliar with our system or the baselines’ formatting conventions and were instructed to judge from the persona’s perspective rather than from stylistic preference. Residual risk remains: a sufficiently distinctive lexical or structural fingerprint could in principle be guessed, and we cannot rule out that some annotators occasionally formed such a guess. We therefore interpret the human-study results as strong but not unconfounded evidence, and view fully blinded protocols (e.g., post-hoc style normalization or third-party rewriting) as useful future work. 

## H. S TE ER Working Prototype 

To illustrate the functionality of STE ER , we build an in-teractive web-based prototype (Figure 10) that visualizes the STE ER framework in action. The interface consists of three synchronized panels: (i) a conversation pane for clarification prompts and user feedback, (ii) a dynamically expanding research tree that reflects the research status and partial research results, and (iii) a live persona tracker that displays the evolving inferred persona ˆP and monitors the updating alignment between cumulative research results and the inferred user aspects ˆA. This prototype supports interactive research sessions, allowing users to guide the exploration by selecting preferred subtopics or introducing new follow-up questions mid-process. 17 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research  

> Figure 8. User study interface.

## I. LLM-as-Judge Evaluation 

To validate the effectiveness of the LLM judge used through-out evaluation, we conduct a small-scale meta-evaluation of the LLM-as-judge. Specifically, we take the alignment score per aspect produced by the LLM judge ( gpt-4.1-mini )and the Coverage score per aspect produced by human an-notators in the user study (both in the scale of 0 - 2), and compute the Pearson correlation r between LLM-assigned and human-assigned scores over all overlapping aspects where both annotations are available. We obtain r = 0 .34 ,

p-value < 0.0001 , indicating a statistically significant, mod-erate positive correlation between the LLM-as-judge and human evaluations. At the annotator level, all annotators exhibit positive correlations with the LLM judge, ranging from 0.19 to 0.45 with small variability (standard devia-tion = 0.094), suggesting that the gpt-4.1-mini ’s scoring is consistently aligned with different human raters rather than being driven by any single annotator. While imperfect, these results indicate that the LLM-judge is directionally consistent with human judgments at the aspect level and is suitable as a scalable proxy for our large-scale evaluation, especially when interpreted alongside the human study that directly validates our main claims. 

## J. Limitations and Future Work 

Simulated personas and queries vs. users’ own queries. 

Our user study asks annotators to mimic a target persona and query rather than using their own information needs. This is intentional: our goal is to evaluate system-level behavior un-der controlled, persona-conditioned information needs and to compare STE ER against baselines on exactly the same persona–query pairs. This requires (i) a fixed set of per-sonas and queries that all systems answer and (ii) a shared reference for annotators, so that cross-system differences in alignment and coverage can be attributed to the system rather than to heterogeneous user goals. If each participant were to choose their own query and implicit persona, differ-ent systems would be evaluated on tasks of varying difficulty, domain, and specificity, making it difficult to perform clean system-level comparisons and to interpret differences in out-comes as stemming from the model rather than from the task. Moreover, obtaining enough repeated measurements per system–persona–task condition under fully free-form user queries would require a substantially larger number of participants and interactions, constituting a much larger user-study effort in terms of human resources, annotation time, and cost. We acknowledge that this controlled design does not fully capture all aspects of real-world usage, par-ticularly long-term adaptation to an individual’s genuine information needs. As outlined in our limitations and future 18 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

work, a natural next step is to conduct more comprehen-sive, end-to-end user studies in which participants bring their own personas and tasks, interact with the system over longer sessions, and are evaluated on richer metrics such as task success, time to insight, perceived control and trust, and cognitive load. 

Blinding in pairwise human evaluation. Our user study compares final reports from STE ER and a baseline side by side in randomized order (Appendix G). Annotators see only the final reports — never clarification turns, interac-tion traces, or intermediate system state — and we did not observe consistent structural cues separating systems. How-ever, perfect blinding is difficult in any open-ended genera-tion setting: lexical, formatting, or organizational tendencies of the underlying model and pipeline could in principle leak system identity. We therefore view the pairwise prefer-ences as supportive but not fully unconfounded evidence, complementing the controlled, persona-conditioned auto-matic evaluation. Stronger blinding (e.g., style-normalized rewrites, third-party paraphrasing, or A/B/X protocols) is a natural next step. 

Robustness to noisy and contradictory user feedback. 

Our User Agent is, by construction, a high-fidelity simulator: it stays consistent with a fixed target persona, responds to every clarification, and does not fatigue. Real users behave differently — they may give contradictory or self-revising answers, supply partial or vague responses, ignore some prompts, or abandon the interaction entirely if asked too much. STE ER ’s live persona module already handles new 

preferences by updating the inferred persona from incoming feedback, but it does not explicitly resolve conflicts between earlier and later signals, nor does it model the cost of dis-engagement when interactions accumulate. We see three concrete extensions as important future work: (i) preference-conflict handling that reconciles contradictory feedback over time, drawing on agent memory and preference-tracking lit-erature; (ii) graceful degradation under partial or missing responses, so the system can still steer with low-confidence signals rather than treating silence as endorsement; and (iii) abandonment-aware pause policies that incorporate user fa-tigue or drop-out risk into the cost-benefit rule. Importantly, we view these as natural extensions of STE ER ’s interactive paradigm rather than departures from it — the same frame-work that opens the door to mid-process steering also opens the door to studying how users actually steer. 

Runtime and latency analysis. A key limitation of this work is that we do not provide a systematic runtime or la-tency analysis of STE ER relative to baseline frameworks. Because STE ER is explicitly designed as an interactive deep-research system, defining and comparing “runtime” in a meaningful way is non-trivial: a naive wall-clock mea-sure would conflate (i) time spent on user interaction (or User Agent responses in our simulations) and (ii) the highly variable size of the research tree induced by different pause policies and user choices. Simply averaging end-to-end run-times could therefore be misleading — STE ER may spend more time within a single run while reducing wasted effort by correcting misalignment earlier, whereas non-steerable baselines may require stacking multiple full deep-research calls to reach a comparable result. Moreover, even in a controlled environment like DeepResearchGym, end-to-end latency is heavily influenced by external factors such as search endpoint stability, network conditions, and rate limits, especially in multi-agent, tool-using pipelines. As a result, raw wall-clock differences are hard to attribute cleanly to the pause policy rather than infrastructure noise. We view a careful efficiency study — using user-centric measures such as time- or turns-to-satisfactory-answer, and stratifying by tree size, number of pauses, and backend conditions — as an important direction for future work, and plan to com-plement our current alignment and quality evaluations with such analyses in follow-up studies. 

## K. Prompt Templates in S TE ER 

We include here the core prompt templates used in our 

STE ER framework, organized by functionality. Each block shows the system prompt and the correspond-ing user prompt . Placeholders such as {query },

{persona text }, and {checklist items } are sub-stituted at runtime. 

Research Planning                                                                                          

> System Prompt
> You are an expert researcher working with aspecific user persona. Your task is to analyze the original query and search results, then generate targeted questions that explore different directions and time periods of the topic, specifically tailored to the user’s interests and checklist items.
> User Prompt
> Original query: \{query\} Current time: \{current_time\} User persona: \{persona_text\} User checklist (aspects they care about): \{checklist_items\} Search results: \{search_results\} Based on these results, the original query, the user’s persona, and their checklist, generate 5-8 unique follow-up questions that: 1. Explore different directions relevant to this query 2. Cover agood wide range of topics and aspects of the query 3. Consider recent developments up to \{current_time\}

19 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

4. Are somewhat tailored to the user’s background and needs, but not constrained by the user’s persona and interests 5. Each follow-up question should cover a distinct thematic facet - do not repeat other questions For each question, provide a confidence score between 0.0 and 1.0 indicating: - Relevance of the question to the main research query - Insightfulness of the question that would be useful for the final report generation - How likely this question is to lead to valuable information for this user Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "follow_up_questions": [\{ "follow_up_question": "follow-up question text", "confidence": 0.0-1.0, "reasoning": "why this is a good follow-up question" \} ]\} 

Search Result Processing 

System Prompt 

You are an expert researcher analyzing search results for a specific user persona. Focus on extracting learnings and follow-up questions that are most relevant to the user’s interests and checklist items. 

User Prompt 

Given the following research results for the query ’\{query\}’, extract key learnings and suggest 5-8 follow-up questions that are specifically relevant to the user’s persona and interests. User persona: \{persona_text\} User checklist (aspects they care about): \{checklist_items\} Previously seen tags: \{seen_tags\} Focus on: 1. Learnings that address the user’s checklist items 2. Information relevant to their background and interests 3. Follow-up questions that would help address their specific needs 4. Each follow-up question should cover a distinct thematic facet - do not repeat other questions For each follow-up question, provide a confidence score between 0.0 and 1.0 indicating: - How likely this question is to lead to valuable information for this user - Alignment with user’s persona and checklist items - Relevance to the original research query Additionally, ALWAYS generate one "wild-card" question in the separate wild_card_question field that goes outside the inferred persona but is plausibly useful for broader understanding of the topic. Additionally, assign tags to categorize what aspects this research content covers. Tags should be short phrases (2-4 words) that describe the key topics, themes, or domains covered by the query, context, and learnings. 

Be very cautious about adding new tags: - FIRST, check if any of the previously seen tags are relevant to this content - REUSE existing tags whenever possible - ONLY add new unseen tags if the content covers aspects not captured by existing tags - Keep tags concise and descriptive Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "learnings": [\{ "insight": "key insight or finding relevant to the user", "source_url": "URL of the source (if available)", "relevance_to_user": "how this learning relates to the user’s interests" \} ], "follow_up_questions": [\{ "follow_up_question": "follow-up question text", "confidence": 0.0-1.0, "reasoning": "why this is a good follow-up question" \} ], "wild_card_question": \{ "question": "wild-card question that goes outside the persona but is plausibly useful", "confidence": 0.0-1.0, "reasoning": "why this wild-card question could be valuable" \}, "tags": ["tag1", "tag2", "tag3"] \} Research query: \{query\} Search results: \{context\} 

Follow-up Questions to Search Queries 

System Prompt 

You are an expert search query optimizer. Your task is to convert follow-up research questions into effective search queries that will yield relevant search results. 

User Prompt 

Convert the following follow-up question into an optimized search query that will yield relevant search results. Original research query: \{original_query\} User persona: \{persona_text\} User checklist (aspects they care about): \{checklist_items\} For each of the following follow-up question, create a search query that: 1. Effectively searches for information to answer the follow-up question 2. Is optimized for search engines 3. Maintains connection to the original research query 4. Considers the user’s persona and interests For each search query, also provide a clear research goal that describes: - What specific information or insights this search aims to discover 

20 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

- How it relates to the original research question - What direction of the topic it will explore Follow-up questions: \{followup_questions\} Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "search_queries": [\{ "follow_up_question": "input follow-up question text", "search_query": "optimized search query", "research_goal": "clear description of what this search aims to discover and how it relates to the original research question" \} ]\} 

Persona Checklist Inference 

System Prompt 

You are an expert at understanding user personas and inferring what aspects they would care about in research responses. Your task is to analyze a user’s persona and generate specific checklist items they would expect to see addressed. 

User Prompt 

Given the following user persona and their research query, infer a checklist of specific aspects that this user would expect to see addressed in a comprehensive research response. User persona: \{persona_text\} Research query: \{query\} Based on this persona and query, generate 5-8 specific checklist items that this user would expect to see in a helpful response. Each item should be: 1. Specific to this user’s background and interests 2. Relevant to the research query 3. Actionable and measurable 4. Distinct from other items Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "checklist_items": ["specific aspect this user would expect to see addressed", "another specific aspect relevant to their interests" ]\} 

Persona Modeling 

System Prompt 

You are an expert at understanding user personas and updating them based on user interactions. Your task is to analyze a user’s response and infer additional information about their persona and interests. 

User Prompt 

Given the following current persona and a user’s response to a research proposal, infer additional information about this user’s persona and interests. Current persona: \{current_persona\} 

Current checklist items they already care about: \{current_checklist\} User’s response: \{user_response\} Based on this response, identify additional information about the user’s: 1. Background and interests 2. Specific preferences and priorities 3. Communication style and concerns 4. Any new aspects they care about IMPORTANT: Do NOT output repetitive information: - Only include NEW persona information that isn’t already covered in the current persona - Only include NEW checklist items that aren’t already in the current checklist - If nothing new can be inferred, return empty strings and empty arrays Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "additional_persona_info": "new information to append to the persona (empty if nothing new)", "new_checklist_items": ["new aspect they mentioned or implied they care about (only if not already in checklist)", "another new aspect if applicable" ]\} 

Clarification Question Generation 

System Prompt 

You are an expert research assistant. Your task is to generate clear, helpful clarification questions that present concise summaries of research directions to users for selection. 

User Prompt 

Based on the following research context, generate a structured clarification question that presents concise summaries of the available research directions to the user for selection. Research query: \{query\} Available research directions (search queries): \{research_directions\} User persona: \{persona_text\} Create a structured question that: 1. Starts with a natural introduction 2. Lists each research direction as numbered bullet points (1., 2., 3., etc.) 3. For each direction, provide a concise summary (1 sentence) that captures the essence of what that search query would explore, rather than showing the raw search query 4. Provides clear selection instructions: - To select directions: just type the bullet numbers (e.g., "1, 3") - To suggest new follow-up questions: start anew line with "New follow-up questions:" followed by each new follow-up question on separate lines 5. Matches the user’s communication style Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "clarification_question": "your structured question to the user with concise summaries" \} 

21 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Report Generation 

System Prompt 

You are a professional research report writer specializing in persona-aware reports. Create comprehensive, well-structured reports based on research data with proper citations, tailored to the specific user’s background and interests. 

User Prompt 

Using the following hierarchically researched information and citations: "\{context\}" Write a comprehensive research report answering the query: "{question}" User persona: \{persona_text\} User interests (checklist items they care about): \{checklist_items\} The report should: 1. Synthesize information from multiple levels of research depth 2. Integrate findings from various research branches 3. Present a coherent narrative that builds from foundational to advanced insights 4. Maintain proper citation of sources throughout 5. Be well-structured with clear sections and subsections 6. Have a minimum length of \{total_words\} words 7. Follow \{report_format\} format with markdown syntax 8. Use markdown tables, lists and other formatting features when presenting comparative data, statistics, or structured information 9. Be tailored to the user’s persona and interests Additional requirements: - Prioritize insights that emerged from deeper levels of research - Highlight connections between different research branches - Include relevant statistics, data, and concrete examples - Focus on directions that align with the user’s interests and checklist - Use language and explanations appropriate for the user’s background - Address the user’s specific concerns and priorities - You MUST determine your own concrete and valid opinion based on the given information. Do NOT defer to general and meaningless conclusions. - You MUST prioritize the relevance, reliability, and significance of the sources you use. Choose trusted sources over less reliable ones. - You must also prioritize new articles over older articles if the source can be trusted. - Use in-text citation references in \{report_format\} format and make it with markdown hyperlink placed at the end of the sentence or paragraph that references them like this: ([in-text citation](url)). - Write in \{language\} Citation requirements: - You MUST write all used source URLs at the end of the report as references - Make sure to not add duplicated sources, but only one reference for each - Every URL should be hyperlinked: [url website](url) - Include hyperlinks to the relevant URLs wherever they are referenced in the report - Format example: Author, A. A. (Year, Month Date). Title of web page. Website Name. [url 

website](url) Please write a thorough, well-researched report that synthesizes all the gathered information into a cohesive whole, tailored specifically to this user’s persona and interests. Assume the current date is \{current_date\}. 

Persona Alignment Evaluation 

System Prompt 

You are an expert evaluator specializing in assessing how well research content aligns with user personas and interests. Your task is to analyze content and determine how well it addresses specific directions important to the user. 

User Prompt 

You are evaluating how well research content aligns with a user’s persona and interests. # User Persona: \{persona_text\} # Research Content: \{content\} # Key Learnings: \{learnings\} # Checklist Items to Evaluate: \{checklist_items\} For each checklist item, evaluate how well the research content and learnings address it. Provide a score from 0-2 for each item: - 0: Not addressed or covered - 1: Somewhat addressed or partially covered - 2: Well addressed or thoroughly covered Return your evaluation as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "evaluations": [\{ "item": "checklist item text", "score": 0-2, "reasoning": "brief explanation of the score" \} ]\} 

## L. Prompt Templates for Data Generation 

We include here the prompt templates used in data genera-tion. 

Profile Generation Prompt 

User Prompt 

Generate a user profile for someone who would logically and reasonably ask the following question: "\{query\}" The profile should include demographic and background information such as age range, occupation, hobbies, family structure, education background, or any other relevant facts. Note that you don’t need to include all of these details for each persona. You can use any kinds of combinations and please think about other aspects other than these.You should include something that can be elicited from daily and natural conversations. You should not include too much information about 

22 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

this person’s work content and you should not give any description about the user’s personality traits. Focus on objective facts about the person. Here are some example profiles for reference: \{profile_examples\} Generate a single user profile that contains around 8-10 distinct facts about the person. The profile should logically connect to why this person would ask the given question. You should only output the profile in plain text format. IMPORTANT: Try to be creative and comprehensive. Make sure the profile makes it realistic for this person to ask the specific question. 

Personality Generation Prompt 

User Prompt 

Generate personality traits for a person with the following profile who would ask this question: "\{query\}" Profile: \{generated_profile\} Based on this profile and the question they would ask, generate appropriate personality traits. You should include something that can be elicited from daily and natural conversations. Each description should contain around 8-10 personality traits about the person. Here are some example personality descriptions for reference: \{personality_examples\} Generate personality traits that are consistent with the profile and make it logical for this person to ask the given question. You should only output the personality description in plain text format. IMPORTANT: You should not include any other content that is beyond personality traits, such as occupation or demographic information (those are already in the profile). Focus only on personality characteristics, behavioral patterns, and psychological traits. Be creative and make sure the personality aligns with both the profile and the research question. 

Aspect Generation Prompt 

User Prompt 

Given a user’s persona and their query, generate alist of specific aspects that this user would expect to see addressed in a high-quality response to their query. These aspects will serve as evaluation criteria to assess how well a response meets this specific user’s needs and expectations. Query: "\{query\}" User Persona: \{persona\} Based on this persona and query, generate 5-8 specific aspects that this user would expect to see in a comprehensive and helpful response. Each aspect should be: 

1. Specific to this user’s background, needs, and context 2. Actionable and measurable (can be used to evaluate a response) 3. Relevant to the query and persona 4. Distinct from other aspects (no overlap) Format your response in JSON format where each aspect is a clear, specific expectation that can be used to evaluate whether a response adequately addresses this user’s needs and provide a clear explanation of why each aspect is significant for the user and what specific details they would expect to see in the response. Focus on what content, depth, style, or approach would be most valuable for this specific user. Each aspect should have the following fields: - aspect: a string that is the name of the aspect that is important to be present in the response - evidence: a string that points to specific details from the user’s persona that indicate this aspect is important - reason: a string that explains why the aspect is important for the user Use the following JSON structure: \{ "aspects": [\{ "aspect": "Name of the aspect", "evidence": "Specific details from the user’s persona that indicate this aspect is important", "reason": "Explanation of why this aspect is important for the user" \} ]\} IMPORTANT: Make the aspects specific to this user’s unique situation and needs, not generic aspects that would apply to any user asking this question. 

## M. Prompt Templates for Evaluation 

We include here the prompt templates used in evaluation scripts. 

Alignment Evaluation Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are a fair and insightful judge with exceptional reasoning and analytical abilities. Your task is to evaluate a user’s question, a generated response to that question, and multiple aspects that are important to the user. Based on this information, assess how well each aspect is addressed in the generated response. Provide a clear and accurate assessment for each aspect. # Your input: - question: the question asked by the user - persona: the user’s persona (profile and personality) that the aspects are based on - response: a generated response to the user’s question - aspects: a list of aspects that are important to the user, each consisting of: - aspect: the title for the aspect - reason: the reason that this aspect is important for the user 

23 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

- evidence: the evidence from the user persona that the aspect was extracted from # Your output: Your output should be a valid JSON object in ‘‘‘json ‘‘‘ format containing the following fields: - evaluations: A list of evaluations for each aspect, where each evaluation contains: - aspect: the aspect title - match_score: A score between 0 to 2 that indicates how well the generated response addresses this aspect, where: * 0 means the response does not cover this aspect * 1 means the response somewhat covers this aspect * 2 means the response covers this aspect very well - reasoning: A detailed explanation of why this score was assigned, including specific examples from the response # Question: \{question\} # Persona: \{persona\} # Response: \{response\} # Aspects: \{aspects_formatted\} Output: 

Sentence Focus Evaluation Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are an expert judge evaluating whether sentences in a report cover specific user aspects. For each sentence, determine which aspects (if any) it addresses. # Your input: - sentences: numbered sentences from a report - aspects: user aspects with IDs, titles, and reasons # Your task: For each sentence, identify whether it covers any of the user aspects. **BE EXTREMELY STRICT** in your evaluation. A sentence covers an aspect ONLY if it: 1. Directly addresses the specific concern or interest described in the aspect 2. Provides substantive, detailed information that would be valuable to someone with that specific aspect 3. Goes beyond mere keyword mentions or general background information A sentence does NOT cover an aspect if it: - Only provides general background or introductory information - Mentions keywords related to the topic but doesn’t address the specific concern - Gives broad overviews without targeting the particular interest - Describes general principles without connecting to the specific aspect - Is just factual information that doesn’t serve the user’s particular need **Default to NOT covering aspects unless there is clear, direct, substantial relevance to the specific user concern.** # JSON Schema for output: 

\{ "type": "object", "patternProperties": \{ "ˆd+\$": \{ "type": "object", "properties": \{ "cover_aspects": \{ "description": "A list of aspect IDs that the sentence covers. If the sentence does not cover any of the aspects, the list should be empty.", "type": "array", "items": \{"type": "integer"\} \}, "reasoning": \{"type": "string"\} \}, "required": ["cover_aspects", "reasoning"] \} \} \} # Sentences: \{sentences_formatted\} # Aspects: \{aspects_formatted\} Output valid JSON: 

Key Point Extract Prompt 

User Prompt 

Based on the report provided, identify key points in the report that directly help in responding to the query. The key points are not simply some key content of the text, but rather the key points that are important for **answering the query**. IMPORTANT: Ensure each point is helpful in responding to the query. Keep the point using the original language and do not add explanations. IMPORTANT: Each span must be a single consecutive verbatim span from the corresponding passages. Copy verbatim the spans, don’t modify any word! Your response should state the point number, followed by its content, and spans in the text that entail the key point. Respond strictly in JSON format: \{ "points": [ \{ "point_content": point_content, "spans": [span1, span2, ...] \}, ... ]\} Remember: - Key points can be abstracted or summarized, but the span must be a copy of the original text. The content of the key point does NOT need to be the same as that of the span. - These keypoints must be helpful in responding tothe query. - If thereare multiple spans for a point, add all of them in the spans list. Report: \{report\} Query: \{query\} Output: 

Key Point Focus Evaluation Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are an expert judge evaluating whether key points of a report cover specific user aspects to answer a query. For each key point, determine which aspects (if any) it addresses. 

24 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

**BE EXTREMELY STRICT** in your evaluation. A key point covers an aspect ONLY if it: 1. Directly addresses the specific concern or interest described in the aspect 2. Provides substantive, detailed information that would be valuable to someone with that specific aspect 3. Goes beyond mere keyword mentions or general background information A key point does NOT cover an aspect if it only provides introductory information or broad overviews **Default to NOT covering aspects unless there is clear, direct, substantial relevance to the specific user concern.** Response strictly in JSON format: \{ "point_number": \{ "cover_aspects": [aspect1, aspect2, ...], "reasoning": reasoning \}, \} # Query: \{query\} # Report Key Points: \{key_points_formatted\} # UserAspects: \{aspects_formatted\} Output: 

User Agent Alignment Evaluation Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are a fair and insightful judge with exceptional reasoning and analytical abilities. Your task is to evaluate a user’s follow-up questions in regard to a query, and multiple aspects that are important to the user. Based on this information, assess how well the follow-up questions trying to cover the user’s interested aspects. An aspect is considered covered if there are follow-up questions are trying to initiate research directions that are related to the aspect. Provide a clear and accurate assessment for each aspect. # Your input: - query: the query asked by the user - persona: the user’s persona (profile and personality) that the aspects are based on - follow-up questions: a list of follow-up questions that the user asked - aspects: a list of aspects that are important to the user, each consisting of: - aspect: the title for the aspect - reason: the reason that this aspect is important for the user - evidence: the evidence from the user persona that the aspect was extracted from # Your output: Your output should strictly be a valid JSON object: \{ "evaluations": [ \{ "aspect": aspect, "match_score": match_score, "reasoning": A detailed explanation of why this score was assigned, including specific examples from the follow-up questions \}, ... ]

\} "match_score" is a score between 0 to 2 that indicates how well the follow-up questions addresses this aspect, where: * 0 means the follow-up questions does not cover this aspect * 1 means the follow-up questions somewhat covers this aspect * 2 means the follow-up questions covers this aspect very well # Query: \{query\} # Persona: \{persona\} # Follow-up Questions: \{follow_up_questions_formatted\} # Aspects: \{aspects_formatted\} Output: 

User Response Precision Evaluation Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are an expert judge evaluating whether a user’s follow-up questions or responses are truly targeted to specific user aspects for answering a query. For each follow-up, determine which aspects (if any) it substantively targets. BE EXTREMELY STRICT. A follow-up COVERS an aspect ONLY if it: 1) Clearly aims to gather information directly relevant to the specific concern described by the aspect; AND 2) Goes beyond surface keywords or generic curiosity. A follow-up does NOT cover an aspect if it: - Is a broad/background question without tailoring to that aspect; OR - Only mentions related keywords but lacks atargeted objective tied to the aspect; OR - Is unrelated to the user’s stated concerns. Respond strictly in JSON format: \{ "response_number": \{ "cover_aspects": [aspect_id_1, aspect_id_2, ...], "reasoning": reasoning \}, ... \} # Query: \{query\} # User Responses (indexed from 0): \{user_responses_formatted\} # User Aspects (IDs start at 0): \{aspects_formatted\} Output: 

Final Persona State Evaluation Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are a fair and insightful judge with exceptional reasoning and analytical abilities. Your task is to evaluate how well items from a final persona state checklist cover user aspects. Given the user’s query, 

25 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

the original persona, a list of checklist items, and the user aspects, assess for each aspect how well the checklist covers it. # Your input: - query: the query asked by the user - persona: the user’s original persona text - checklist: a list of items inferred that might be important for the user to answer the query - aspects: a list of aspects that are indeed important to the user as ground truth, each consisting of aspect, reason, and evidence # Your output: Return strictly valid JSON of the form: \{ "evaluations": [\{ "aspect": aspect_title, "match_score": 0|1|2, "reasoning": detailed_reasoning_referencing_specific _checklist_items \}, ... ]\} Interpret match_score as: - 0: the checklist does not cover this aspect - 1: the checklist somewhat covers this aspect - 2: the checklist covers this aspect very well # Query: \{query\} # Persona: \{persona\} # Checklist Items: \{checklist_formatted\} # Aspects: \{aspects_formatted\} Output: 

## N. Additional Prompt Templates 

We include here the prompt templates used for User Agent and Pause Agent. 

User Agent 

System Prompt 

You are simulating a real user with a specific persona and interests. Your task is to respond to SteER’s research proposals by selecting relevant directions and suggesting new directions based on your persona and research interests. 

User Prompt 

You are acting as a user with the following persona: # User Persona: \{persona_text\} # Aspects and directions You Care About: \{aspects_text\} # History of your previous asked questions: \{questions_history_text\} # Research Query: \{query\} # SteER’s Proposal: \{steer_proposal\} 

SteER is presenting research directions as numbered bullet points. Based on your persona and interests, respond as this user would by: 1. Selecting ONLY the most relevant direction numbers that have the highest priority for this research 2. Suggesting new follow-up questions ONLY if you feel there’s a very important direction missing from the proposal 3. Providing natural commentary as this user would speak **IMPORTANT CONSTRAINTS:** - **DO NOT select directions or suggest questions that are outside your persona and aspects/interests** - **DO NOT suggest questions you have already asked before or that are similar to the questions you have already asked (check your history above)** - Only focus on areas that align with your specific expertise, interests, and concerns as described in your persona - If all current directions seem unrelated to your interests, it’s better to select none and suggest relevant alternatives Focus on quality over quantity - select only the directions that truly matter most to you and align with your expertise. You should refrain from suggesting new follow-up questions unless something critical is missing and directly relates to your interests. You should at most suggest 1 new follow-up question. The probability of you suggesting a new follow-up question is 50%. Your response should reflect how this person would actually communicate when discussing their research preferences. Return your response as a JSON object with the following structure: \{ "selected_directions": [\{ "number": 1, "direction": "direction name from the proposal", "reasoning": "why this direction is most important to you and aligns with your interests" \} ], "new_follow_up_questions": [\{ "follow_up_question": "suggested new follow-up question. Most of the time you should not suggest new follow-up questions. But only if you feel there’s a very important direction missing from the proposal, suggest one new follow-up question at most", "reasoning": "why this follow-up question is important, missing, and relevant to your interests" \} ], "user_response": "natural response as this user would speak (in the format: selected numbers with reasoning in parentheses, then ’New follow-up questions:’ if any)", "additional_context": "any additional preferences or clarifications related to your expertise" \} 

Pause Agent 

26 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

System Prompt 

You are an expert research assistant specialized in making optimal pause decisions during deep research. Your task is to analyze the current research state and decide whether it’s a good time to pause and ask for user guidance on which research branches to pursue, or to proceed with the current research plan. 

User Prompt 

You need to decide whether to pause and ask for user guidance or proceed with the current research plan. # Context: **Original Query:** \{original_query\} **Current Research Goal:** \{current_research_goal\} **User Persona:** \{persona_text\} **User Interests (Checklist):** \{checklist_items\} **Current Search Depth:** \{current_depth\} /\{max_depth\} # Available Research Branches: {branch_summaries} # Decision Criteria: Consider pausing (PAUSEASK) when: - User input would help prioritize which direction to pursue - There’s uncertainty about which direction aligns best with the user’s specific interests Analyze the situation and make your decision. Your reasoning should be specific to the current research context, user persona, and branch characteristics. Respond in the following JSON format: \{ "type": "object", "properties": \{ "action": \{ "type": "string", "enum": ["PROCEED", "PAUSEASK"], "description": "Decision to proceed with research or pause to ask user for guidance" \}, "reasoning": \{ "type": "string", "description": "Detailed explanation of the decision based on research context and user persona" \} \}, "required": ["action", "reasoning"] \} 

27 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Figure 9. User study instructions. 

28 An Interactive Paradigm for Deep Research 

Figure 10. Interface of STE ER web application. 

29